Viksit Maharashtra is the 
most important part of the 
resolution of Viksit Bharat
- Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi ji
Shri Chandrashekhar Bawankule
State President BJP, Maharashtra
Jai Bhavani, Jai Shivaji!
Bharatiya Janata Party has always been a party that brings new changes in the State of 
Maharashtra and has worked towards making the State one of the leading states in terms of 
growth in the country. The Mahayuti Government in the state has taken the progress to new 
heights. As we complete 2.5 years of governance, we have laid the groundwork for a new era of 
progress and prosperity driven by the aspirations and dreams of every citizen of this great State.
The NDA Government, under the dynamic leadership of Hon. Prime Minister Shri Narendra 
Modi Ji, has transformed India into a nation of unparalleled growth and opportunity. Here in 
Maharashtra, our Government has mirrored this spirit, implementing bold reforms and 
inclusive policies to propel our state forward. Our achievements, whether in infrastructure, 
agriculture, healthcare, or education, reflect our commitment to a ‘people-first’ governance 
model that ensures development touches every corner and community.
Maharashtra’s cultural pride and heritage have always been a priority. We have honoured the 
state’s Asmita through various initiatives: featuring Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj’s emblem on 
the Navy flag, bestowing classical language status upon Marathi, and acquiring Babasaheb 
Ambedkar’s house in London. But today, there are forces at work trying to misguide and 
spread false narratives, aiming to halt our State’s progress.
We believe in the ideology of ‘Ek Maharashtra Shresht Maharashtra’ and are committed to 
the motto of Yuti – Gati - Pragati. Over the past years, we have worked tirelessly to transform 
our promises into reality. From boosting infrastructure and creating employment opportunities 
to revolutionising the healthcare and education sectors, we have laid the foundation for a 
resilient and thriving state. 
The ‘Ladki Bahin Yojana’ has been launched for women’s empowerment, providing them with 
financial support of ₹1,500 per month. This scheme, initiated by the late Manohar Parrikar in 
Goa, has proven successful in BJP-governed Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh. Although the 
Mahavikas Aghadi has downplayed such schemes, we pledge to continue this scheme in 
Maharashtra. We are committed to making the state drought-free by waiving electricity bills 
for farmers’ pump sets and providing free electricity, along with initiatives like Nilwande, 
Tembu Lift Irrigation, Jalyukt Shivar, Nar-Par, and Daman Ganga-Godavari projects.
The Bharatiya Janata Party is the only party that takes its manifesto 
seriously, fulfils its promises, and conducts a thorough review each 
year. This manifesto represents our commitment to making Maharashtra 
the most advanced and prosperous state to transform it into a trillion-
dollar economy. Our aim is to make the state drought-free, create 
employment opportunities, develop world-class infrastructure, and 
provide every family with shelter and clean water. Join us in 
building a prosperous, self-reliant, and strong Maharashtra, 
where every citizen will progress, and every dream will 
come true.
Thank You, Jai Maharashtra
Chandrashekhar Bawankule
State President BJP , Maharashtra
Message…
Dear Sisters and Brothers,
Jai Bhavani, Jai Shivaji!
The Bharatiya Janata Party has accepted the responsibility of leading Maharashtra towards 
progress and prosperity. With the vision of “Ek Maharashtra - Shreshtha Maharashtra,”  the 
BJP has consistently prioritised development, progress, and public welfare, while upholding 
and nurturing the spirit of Maharashtra’s dharma. Through the concept of ‘Mahayuti-Gati-
Pragati,’ we have united the best of minds and initiatives to drive Maharashtra’s progress and 
development. We firmly believe that together, we can help Maharashtra attain new heights.
With the guidance and support of our esteemed Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi Ji and 
Union Home Minister Shri Amitbhai Shah Ji, Maharashtra has achieved remarkable progress 
since 2014, with the exception of the two-and-a-half years of stagnation under the MVA 
Government. Our state is a nation-wide frontrunner  in vital areas such as investment, 
employment, and infrastructure development.
Empowering women remains a central component of our vision. Under the ‘Ladki Bahin’ 
scheme, we have been providing our sisters with a monthly honorarium of ₹1,500 to support 
financial independence. Our dedication to farmers is steadfast; the Mahayuti Government 
has ensured free electricity for farmers, with zero electricity bills now a reality. We are 
committed to making Maharashtra drought-free by reviving the Jalyukt Shivar initiative and 
advancing river-linking projects. These efforts have bolstered Maharashtra’s position as a 
premier destination for global investments across sectors such as semiconductors and green 
energy, positioning the state on a path toward becoming an economic superpower. As a result, 
Maharashtra has attracted 52% of the total investments flowing into the country.
In Maharashtra, a strong foundation has been laid, and we are confident this foundation will 
bear fruits of prosperity for all citizens. By sustaining this momentum, Maharashtra’s journey 
toward a trillion-dollar economy is inevitable. This progress will position us as the nation’s 
foremost state in terms of wealth and opportunity.
This election is not just about choosing a Government; it is also 
about preserving Maharashtra’s development, heritage, and 
aspirations. It is crucial to choose a Government that believes in 
the potential of its people. I urge you all to come out in large 
numbers, cast your vote, and support the BJP and Mahayuti 
Government in their journey towards a stronger, more prosperous 
Maharashtra. Let us translate the promise of “Ek Maharashtra - 
Shreshtha Maharashtra”  into reality.
Thank you, Jai Maharashtra!
Devendra Fadnavis  
Deputy Chief Minister, Maharashtra State
Shri Devendra Fadnavis
Deputy Chief Minister, MaharashtraVande  Mataram,
The 2024 Maharashtra Legislative Assembly election is crucial in determining the direction 
and pace of the State’s development and preserving our culture and traditions.
This election coincides with significant anniversaries: the 350th year of Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj’s coronation, the 300th year of Punyashlok Ahilyadevi Holkar’s birth anniversary, the 
75th anniversary of the Indian Constitution, the 150th birth anniversary of Iron Man Sardar 
Vallabhai Patel, the 150th birth anniversary of Veer Birsa Munda, and the centenary of our 
visionary former Prime Minister, Atal Bihari Vajpayee.
Following the 2019 Assembly elections, Maharashtra endured a period of halted development. 
However, we have now emerged from that challenging time and entered a promising new era 
of progress. To prevent a recurrence of the stagnation seen from 2019 to 2022, it’s crucial that 
we put in our best efforts in these elections.
With the BJP and its allies now forming the Government at the Center, we are poised for 
greater progress. Since 2014, under the visionary leadership of Prime Minister Shri Narendra 
Modi Ji, India has achieved remarkable milestones across all sectors. Guided by the unwavering 
commitment of leaders like Shri Amitbhai Shah Ji and Shri J.P . Nadda Ji, the BJP has advanced 
with dynamic energy and purpose. To sustain and accelerate Maharashtra’s development 
journey in alignment with the Center, it is vital that the BJP-Mahayuti alliance leads the 
government here. We are confident that Mahayuti’s steadfast unity and shared vision will 
resonate with the people and ensure a decisive victory.
As we face this election, a manifesto outlining our policy direction and key focus areas for the 
State’s development is being prepared to present to the voters. We identified priority sectors 
and formed sub-committees with experts in each domain. Additionally, we invited suggestions 
from various scholars and the general public to contribute to the development plan for the 
state. A dedicated email ID and WhatsApp number were set up for this purpose, and the 
initiative received an overwhelming response.
This manifesto sets the path for transforming Maharashtra into a trillion-dollar economy. Our 
roadmap prioritises giving agriculture the respect, security, and prosperity it deserves, while 
ensuring safety, dignity, and equal opportunities for women. We are committed to reaching 
the benefits of development to the last individual in society, embodying the principle of 
‘Antyodaya’. The manifesto covers commitments for all sections of society, including farmers, 
youth, women, workers, and senior citizens. Through this manifesto, we aim to showcase the 
Bharatiya Janata Party’s sincere dedication to the State’s welfare and 
progress.
I express my heartfelt gratitude to the party leadership for giving me 
the opportunity to serve as the chairman of this manifesto 
committee and for entrusting me with this responsibility. I also 
thank the chairpersons and members of the sub-committees, and 
all those who contributed directly or indirectly to the preparation 
of this manifesto.
I urge all of you to study this manifesto, understand its 
promises, and convey them effectively to the voters.
Jai Hind, Jai Maharashtra.
Sudhir Mungantiwar  
Chairman, Manifesto CommitteeShri Sudhir Mungantiwar
Manifesto Committee PresidentManifesto Committee 
Members
Chairman - Shri Sudhir Mungantiwar
7
Dr. Vinay Sahasrabuddhe Shri Dilip Kamble
Shri Madhavrao Bhandari Shri Pasha Patel
Adv. Ujjwal Nikam Shri Anil Sole 
Dr. Bhartitai Pawar MLA Shri Parag Alawani
MLA Shri Mangal Prabhat Lodha Shri Laxman Savaji
MLA Shri Subhash Deshmukh Shri Suresh Haware
MLA Shri Sambhaji Nilangekar Shri Vishwas Pathak
MP Shri Dhananjay Mahadik Shri Keshav Upadhye
MP Smt. Smita Wagh Smt. Madhavi Naik
MLA Shri Atul Bhatkhalkar Shri Rajesh Pandey
Shri Narendra Pawar Shri Yogesh Gogavale
Shri Milind Tulaskar Smt. Nita Kelkar
Shri Amol Jadhav Shri Kiran Paturkar
Acharya Tushar Bhosale Shri Dayashankar Tiwari
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA8MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 20249
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRAINDEX
Top 25 Highlights 10
Agriculture and Allied Sector 16
Economy and Industry 22
Education 26
Youth and Sports 28
Healthcare 32
Mahila Samman 36
Social Justice 38
Good Governance and Public Administration 42
Infrastructure 44
Urban Development 46
Rural Development 48
Culture and Tourism 50
Environment, Forest and Natural Resources 54
Mumbai Metropolitan Region  5601  
02  
03
04  
05  
06
07  
08
09  
10  
11 
12 
13 
14
15TOP 
25 HIGHLIGHTS
Under the Ladki Bahin Yojana , financial assistance will be 
increased from ₹1,500 to ₹2,100  per beneficiary, and financial 
literacy training will also be provided  to strengthen their financial 
independence. Further, 25,000 women  will be inducted into the 
police  force across Maharashtra.
A loan waiver will be provided for farmers, along with an increase 
in support under the Kisan Samman Yojana from ₹12,000 to 
₹15,000  annually. Additionally, a price support scheme  will be 
introduced in alignment with the MSP  to cover price variations 
of up to 20% .
Food and shelter  will be provided to all poor people in the State.
The Old Age Pension  will be increased from ₹1,500 to ₹2,100 
per month , providing greater financial security and dignity for 
senior citizens across Maharashtra.
10MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024Prices of essential items will be stabilised to ensure affordability 
and shield households across Maharashtra from market 
fluctuations.TOP 
25 HIGHLIGHTS
A monthly stipend of ₹10,000  will be provided to 10 lakh 
students across Maharashtra  to support their education and 
ease financial burdens on families. Additionally, 25 lakh jobs 
will be created  in the state.
Anganwadi workers and ASHA Sevaks  will receive a monthly 
honorarium of ₹15,000  and insurance coverage to ensure their 
financial security and well-being.
11
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA
Electricity bills will be reduced by 30% , with a greater focus on 
solar and renewable energy  sources.Farm tracks  will be built across 45,000 villages  in Maharashtra.
Within 100 days of forming the Government, we will present 
‘Vision Maharashtra 2029’ .12MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
By 2028, Maharashtra aims to become a $1 trillion economy .
To make Maharashtra a global hub in technology, manufacturing, 
and innovation, the following steps will be taken:
a. By implementing the ‘Make in Maharashtra’ policy , 
Maharashtra’s position as a leading manufacturing State in 
India will be further strengthened.
b. Maharashtra will be established as the global capital for fintech 
and artificial intelligence (AI) . To achieve this, an environment 
will be created to attract global fintech companies and promote 
new concepts in financial technology. Additionally, the 
country’s first dedicated AI university will be established  to 
foster AI research, innovation, and development.
c. Nagpur, Pune, Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar, Ahilyanagar, and 
Nashik will be developed into modern aeronautical and space 
production centres , establishing them as advanced aerospace 
technology and manufacturing hubs.
To increase farmers’ income , we will implement the following 
comprehensive initiatives:
a. Farmers will receive a rebate on the entire State Goods and 
Services Tax (SGST) paid on purchased fertilisers , refunded 
to them as a subsidy.
b. To ensure farmers receive a minimum price of ₹6,000 per 
quintal for soybeans , we will establish a dedicated value chain 
for soybean production, processing, and value addition.
TOP 
25 HIGHLIGHTS13
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA
By 2027, 50 lakh lakhpati didis  will be created in Maharashtra. To 
achieve this, an industrial cluster will be established  for every 
500 self-help groups , with an initial revolving fund of ₹1,000 
crore .
A Skill Census will be conducted in Maharashtra  to analyse the 
skill gaps based on industry needs. This will enable the provision 
of skilled manpower and facilitate the planning for the availability 
of a new skilled workforce as required .
We will introduce the ‘MAHARATHI (Maharashtra Advanced 
Robotics and AI Training Hub Initiative)—ATL (Atal Tinkering 
Labs) Yojana’ , offering Robotics and AI learning opportunities in 
all State Government schools.Under the Akshay Anna Yojana, free rations , including rice, jowar, 
groundnut oil, salt, sugar, turmeric, mustard, cumin, and red chilli 
powder, will be provided monthly to families from low-income 
groups .TOP 
25 HIGHLIGHTS14MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
A ‘Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Akanksha Kendra’ will be 
established in every district of Maharashtra, through which 10 lakh 
new entrepreneurs will be created . These centres will include  
co-working spaces and incubation facilities  where students, 
professionals, and entrepreneurs can connect, network, and 
promote innovative concepts.
Interest-free loans of up to ₹15 lakh  will be provided to 
entrepreneurs of Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe, and other 
backward classes for their business growth.
Eligible students from the OBC, SEBC, EWS, NT, and VJNT categories 
will receive reimbursement of tuition and examination fees .
Swami Vivekananda Youth Health Card  will be launched for 
annual health check-ups  of youth aged 18 to 35, and a permanent 
scheme for Nashamukt-Vyasanmukt Maharashtra  will be 
implemented.
TOP 
25 HIGHLIGHTS15
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA
Maharashtra is home to many ancient and historical forts, which 
symbolise the State’s glory and play a significant role in its 
historical and cultural development. To preserve and promote 
this heritage, a Fort Development Authority (FDA)  will be 
established.
A strict law will be enacted against forced and fraudulent 
conversions , ensuring protection from coercive and deceptive 
religious conversions.
To prevent loss of life and property caused by wildlife such as 
tigers, leopards, elephants, nilgai, wild boars, and monkeys in 
agricultural and human settlement areas, as well as to  reduce 
human-wildlife conflict, modern technologies like artificial 
intelligence (AI), drones, and radio collars  will be effectively 
utilised.
A ‘Senior Citizens First’ policy  will be adopted, which includes:
a. Implementing Aadhaar Enabled Service Delivery (AESD)  to 
ensure automated services for every senior citizen.
b. For all senior citizens aged 80 and above , arrangements will 
be made to deliver requested documents -such as health 
records, identification papers, and pension-related 
documents- directly to their homes .
c. Establishing dedicated outpatient departments (OPDs)  for 
senior citizens in all Government hospitals.TOP 
25 HIGHLIGHTS1. A loan waiver  will be provided for farmers, along with an increase in support 
under the Kisan Samman Yojana from ₹12,000 to ₹15,000  annually. Additionally, a 
price support scheme  will be introduced in alignment with the MSP to cover price 
variations of up to 20% .
2. An annual cultivation and marketing plan  will be formulated to ensure fair prices 
for farmers’ produce , especially for cash crops.
3. Irrigation:  We will expand  irrigated areas and enhance water resources and 
irrigation capacity  across Maharashtra, with initiatives like Jalyukt Shivar Abhiyan 
3.0, the Marathwada Water Grid  Project, the Nar-Par-Girna River Link Project , 
and the Nal-Ganga-Wainganga River Link  Project. A ‘Water Budgeting’ concept will 
be implemented at every village level, along with expanding the ‘Magel Tyala Shet 
Tale’  (Farm Pond on Demand) scheme. Additionally, grants for micro-irrigation will 
be increased  to promote the ‘Per Drop More Crop’ initiative.
4. Farm tracks  will be built across 45,000 villages  in Maharashtra.
5. Dr Punjabrao Deshmukh Organic Farming Mission:  To encourage sustainable 
agricultural practices, the area under organic farming will be increased from 10 
lakh hectares to 25 lakh hectares by 2029. Organic farming markets  will be 
established at district and taluka levels.
Agriculture: Our goal is to bring 
prestige, security, and prosperity to 
farming.Agriculture
and Allied 
Sector
OUR PROMISES
16MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 20246. Maharashtra will be transformed into an agri-tech startup hub  by creating division-
wise clusters and allocating substantial funds  for technology-based agricultural 
management.
7. Under the visionary ‘Annadata to Urjadata’  initiative, farmers will be actively 
involved in solar energy production , turning them into energy providers . This 
innovative program will introduce solar panel-covered farming , supported by 
incentive-based grants  to promote energy-producing farms across the State .
8. Maharashtra will be developed as a centre for maize and bamboo-based ethanol 
production , promoting sustainable energy generation, supporting 
local agriculture, and driving economic growth through strategic 
incentives.
9. Apiculture (beekeeping) will be encouraged as a supplementary 
livelihood  to boost farmers’ incomes. Training and outreach 
programs will be launched to assist 1 lakh farmers in 
incorporating beekeeping  alongside traditional farming 
practices.
10. To increase farmers’ income , we will implement the 
following comprehensive initiatives:
a. Farmers will receive a rebate on the entire State 
Goods and Services Tax (SGST) paid on purchased 
fertilisers , refunded to them as a subsidy.
b. To ensure farmers receive a minimum price of ₹6,000 
per quintal for soybean , we will establish a dedicated 
value chain for soybean production, processing, and value addition.
11. To prevent post-harvest losses and maintain crop quality  until it reaches the market 
at favourable prices, we will establish a  ‘Krushi Sankalan Kosh’  to develop solar-
powered cold storage and smart packaging  facilities across rural Maharashtra.
12. Cotton-picking and processing will be modernised with advanced technology. Under 
this, measures will be taken to strengthen the ‘Cotton to Cloth’ value chain, ensuring 
economic benefits for the farmers and the textile industry .
13. Maharashtra will be positioned as a major pulse-producing region, with processing 
centres established in rural areas to make the  state self-sufficient  in pulse production 
by 2027.OUR PROMISES
17
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA14. To boost agricultural exports, large-scale packing houses will be established to 
enhance storage and processing capacities , promoting export-oriented crop 
production. These centres will offer training in packing and processing , enhancing 
vocational skills and creating job opportunities. 
15. Through Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samriddhi Kendras , we will promote sustainable 
farming  practices, contributing to increased farmer income.
16. A comprehensive policy  will be implemented to ensure fair prices for onions. An 
‘Onion Portal’ will be launched for onion production registration , and a ‘Market 
Stabilisation Fund’  will be established to maintain stable onion prices. Recognising 
the perishability of onions, incentives  will be provided for developing onion storage 
and processing clusters .
17. An annual Shetkari Pragati Mahotsav  will be organised in each district, featuring 
two-day intensive training sessions  on agriculture specifically for women and 
youth. The event will offer free entry to exhibitions, live demonstrations of modern 
farming technologies, and opportunities for idea exchange among diverse 
agricultural stakeholders.
18. To boost agricultural output and efficiency, a ‘यांं�त्रि�क कृषीी’ Mission (Farm Mechanisation 
Mission)  will be launched, which will include:
a. Training farmers with knowledge of farm mechanisation .
b. Efforts to reduce the cost of agricultural inputs  for lowering production 
expenses by using drone technology .
19. To ensure fair market access and prices for 
agricultural produce , Agricultural 
Produce Market Committees (APMCs) 
will be modernised through 
information technology.
20. Comprehensive training 
programs will be organised for 
Farmer Producer Organisations 
(FPOs)  to enhance their skills 
and enable them to fully utilise 
available incentives and funding.
18MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 202419Cooperatives
23. In light of the changing trends in rural areas and the agricultural sector, necessary 
changes will be made to strengthen the District Cooperative Banks (DCBs) and 
Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS)  by enhancing their efficiency, 
transparency, good governance, and professionalism.
24. Modern policies will be formulated for sugar and cotton cooperatives  to make 
them more competitive and efficient through advanced technology and improved 
management practices.
25. A single-window system will be established  to form new cooperative societies , 
which includes an online application and tracking system , resulting in increased 
transparency in this process and faster approval procedures.
26. We will launch a comprehensive Green Energy Programme  in co-operatives, 
including:
a. Grant-in-aid  for ethanol storage enhancement in cooperative sugar mills.
b. Arrangement of equity funding at a ratio of 1:2  for establishing bio-CNG, solar 
energy, and hydrogen projects.
c. 50% grant-in-aid  for establishing briquetting and pelleting units using agricultural 
biomass.
d. Subsidised funding for operational costs of green energy projects  through the 
National Cooperative Development Corporation (NCDC).
e. Interest subvention for capital expenditures on green energy infrastructure.21. To make Farmer Producer Organisations 
(FPOs)  more technically and practically 
proficient , a policy will be implemented 
to connect them with renowned private 
sector industries related to their produce.
22. An orange pulp processing plant  will be 
established in Nagpur’s MIHAN, and  banana 
processing plants  will be set up in Jalgaon and Nanded.
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA27. Cooperative societies will be encouraged to establish crop-based agricultural 
processing units  outside the sugar sector:  
a. Arrangement of equity funding in a 1:2 ratio  for setting up processing units.
b. Providing concessional rate financing for the operational expenses of agro-
processing units in co-operatives.
28. The ‘Maharashtra Matsya Mission’  will be launched to double fish production by 
2030  with the following measures:
a. Infrastructure such as cold storage, bio floc systems, and cage fish farming  
facilities will be established.
b. A robust market linkage chain will be developed  to ensure favourable market 
prices for fish production.
29. To make Maharashtra a leading shrimp-producing State in the country , we will 
increase shrimp production in small and large water bodies by:
a. Training and support will be provided through technical assistance centres for 
the sustainable economic development of fish farmers engaged in shrimp 
production.
b. An insurance protection scheme  for shrimp farming will be initiated.
30. Fishing Cooperatives will be empowered  by providing financial assistance, training, 
and processing & marketing infrastructure, thereby boosting the livelihoods of 
fishermen  along Maharashtra’s coastline.
Fisheries
20MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 202431. By launching the ‘Maharashtra Dugdh Vikas Mission,  ’ milk production capacity will 
be increased to  300 Lakh MT by 2030 , thereby promoting the dairy processing 
industry and sales.  
32. Mobile veterinary clinics/ambulances  will be provided in every taluka to safeguard 
the livestock in the State.  
33. Breeding and nurturing cattle indigenous to Maharashtra , including Dangi, Deoni, 
Gaolao, Khillari and Red Khandhari, will be incentivised.
34. To support and promote the conservation and protection of cattle, the previously 
implemented Govardhan - Govansh Seva Kendra Yojana  will be expanded.
Animal Husbandry
21
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRAEconomy
and Industry
1. By 2028, Maharashtra aims to become a $1 trillion economy . 
2. The Ease of Doing Business Act  will be implemented.
3. A ‘Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Akanksha Kendra’  will be established in 
every district of Maharashtra, through which 10 lakh new entrepreneurs will be 
created . These centres will include  co-working spaces and incubation facilities  
where students, professionals, and entrepreneurs can connect, network, and 
promote innovative concepts.
4. To make Maharashtra a global hub in technology, manufacturing, and innovation, 
the following steps will be taken:
a. By implementing the ‘Make in Maharashtra’ policy,  Maharashtra’s position as 
a leading manufacturing State in India will be further strengthened.
b. Maharashtra will be established as the  global capital for fintech and artificial 
intelligence (AI) . To achieve this, an environment will be created to attract 
global fintech companies and promote new concepts in financial technology. 
Additionally, the country’s first  dedicated AI university will be established  to 
foster AI research, innovation, and development.
c. Nagpur, Pune, Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar, Ahilyanagar, and Nashik will be 
developed into modern aeronautical and space production centres , establishing 
them as advanced aerospace technology and manufacturing hubs.India’s Growth EngineOUR PROMISES
22MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024OUR PROMISES
5. Jalgaon, Amravati, Nanded, and Solapur will be established as new industrial 
districts for the sunrise industries .
6. To establish Nashik as the next IT hub  in Maharashtra, world-class facilities will be 
provided in the proposed IT park and will be completed.
7. The Vidarbha-Marathwada Defence Circuit Corridor , the largest defence project in 
India, will be established, impacting 12 districts in Maharashtra and creating 
significant employment opportunities.
8. By setting up a food park in Solapur, local ready-to-eat and ready-to-cook products 
like shenga chutney  will be promoted.
Industrial Promotion
9. Under the ‘One District One Product’ (ODOP) initiative, 
three stalls will be reserved in every mall  to promote 
local products from Maharashtra.
10. Financial incentives will be provided  to small 
businesses, such as fruit, flower, vegetable, and hand 
cart vendors.
11. 32 defunct coal mines  will be repurposed in Vidarbha  for 
Coal Gasification Projects.
12. The existing Ferro Alloy Plant  will be expanded  in Chandrapur District.
13. The 1,000-acre PM Mitra Park project in Amravati district  will be accelerated to 
boost regional development.
14. A mega textile park will be established in the Parbhani district , encompassing the 
entire clothing value chain, including fibre extraction, weaving, dyeing, printing, 
and garment manufacturing.
15. A toy manufacturing cluster will be established in Nashik  to make it the largest toy 
production centre in the country.
23
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA16. A training centre for 
the coir industry will 
be established in North 
Konkan  with the help of 
the Central Government’s 
Coir Board. The coir policy 
will be expanded in 
Maharashtra , and a ‘Konkan 
Coconut and Coir Festival’ will be 
organised every year.
17.   The export of  Kolhapuri chappals  will be 
given key focus by promoting the local 
manufacturing industry.
18.    A turmeric park will be established in Sangli , 
promoting Government branding for GI-tagged Sangli 
turmeric and spices.
19. Multi-Modal Logistics Parks (MMLPs)  will be established to ensure balanced 
industrial development.
20. Local entrepreneurs  will be prioritised when allocating plots in the MIDC area, 
encouraging their growth. 
21. A plug-and-play facility MSME  (Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises) park will be 
established in Jalna .  
22. In the Gadchiroli and Chandrapur districts, bamboo artisans will receive training 
and certification  through the Bamboo Research and Training Center to foster their 
entrepreneurial skills .Micro, Small, And Medium 
Enterprise (MSME) Promotion
24MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 202425
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA1. We will establish Swatantrya Veer Savarkar Art and Sports 
Complexes , inspired by Bal Bhavan , to provide rural students 
with appropriate guidance in arts, music, and sports.
2. A Digital Education Empowerment Program (DEEP)  will be 
launched, which will include:
a. Establishment of state-of-the-art computer laboratories  in all Government 
schools, with internet access provided to each school.
b. Implementing interactive teaching methods in Science, Technology, 
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)  education.
c. Under the ‘New Education Policy (NEP) 2020’ , an option to learn computer 
languages will be made available.
d. Implementing an Artificial Intelligence (AI) education system  -‘Mahavidya’  in 
every Government school.
3. All existing Anganwadis will be upgraded to the new generation’s ‘Saksham 
Anganwadis’ .
4. A state-of-the-art Karmaveer Bhaurao Patil Adarsh Marathi School  (model 
composite school) will be established in every district, providing quality education 
from pre-primary to 12th grade . This will include:
a. A spacious 10-acre campus with smart classrooms  and state-of-the-art 
laboratories for robotics, machine learning, and digital skills.
b. Residential facilities for students  and a fully-equipped sports complex.
OUR PROMISES
Education
26MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 20245. By launching the ‘CM SHRI Scheme,’  educational facilities will be improved for 
Marathi schools that could not be included in the PM SHRI scheme , enhancing 
their infrastructure and modern educational amenities.
6. To promote skill development for students from grades 6 to 12 and to introduce 
them to professional knowledge, the current work-experience subject in school 
education will be expanded  with the collaboration of local organisations and 
technical training institutes.
7. Eligible students from the OBC, SEBC, EWS, NT, and VJNT categories  will receive 
reimbursement of tuition and examination fees .
8. An ‘Edu-City’  will be established under the NAINA project, which is being developed 
as the ‘Third Mumbai’ in the Navi Mumbai area. This will encourage world-class 
educational institutions.
9. An independent university for ocean science and fisheries  will be established.  
10. The modernisation of  Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs)  will be undertaken, along 
with curriculum renewal to include subjects such as Augmented Reality (AR), 
Virtual Reality (VR), Artificial Intelligence (AI), and Machine Learning (ML) . 
Additionally, the number of ITIs will be increased as per requirements.OUR PROMISES
27
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRAYouth Empowerment
Skill Development1. Under the Chhatrapati Sambhaji Maharaj Youth Leadership 
Training Scheme, 10,000 youths  will be trained for political and 
public leadership.  
2. Swami Vivekananda Youth Health Card  will be launched for annual health 
check-ups  of youth aged 18 to 35, and a permanent scheme for Nashamukt-
Vyasanmukt Maharashtra  will be implemented.   
3. Improvements will be made to enhance transparency in the State Government 
recruitment examinations .  
4. Instead of charging different fees for various competitive exams conducted for the 
recruitment process, a  single annual fee will be implemented . This fee will be 
reasonable and allow candidates to appear for the exams based on their eligibility.  
OUR PROMISES
5. A Craft University will be established  to recognise and promote traditional skills.
6. We will introduce the ‘MAHARATHI (Maharashtra Advanced Robotics and AI 
Training Hub Initiative)-ATL (Atal Tinkering Labs) Yojana’ , offering Robotics and AI 
learning opportunities in all State Government schools.Youth  
and Sports  
28MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 20247. To promote and preserve traditional crafts in the field of craftsmanship and to 
encourage skill development, a ‘Lokshahir Annabhau Sathe Kalagram’  will be 
established. This initiative will provide specialised training for artisans and equip 
them with the necessary tools  to succeed in the modern market.
8. A Skill Census will be conducted in Maharashtra  to analyse the skill gaps based on 
industry needs. This will enable the provision of skilled manpower and facilitate the 
planning for the availability of a new skilled workforce as required .
OUR PROMISES
Employment
9. A monthly stipend of ₹10,000 will be provided to 10 lakh students across 
Maharashtra  to support their education and ease financial burdens on families. 
Additionally, 25 lakh jobs will be created  in the state.
10. Recruitment for 11,000 teachers has already been completed , and now a 
‘Mahabharti Abhiyan’  will be launched to fill all remaining vacancies.
11. An Overseas Placement Cell  will be established for the youth of Maharashtra, 
facilitating job registrations for Grade C and D positions  through government-to-
government (G2G) agreements  with other countries and Fortune 500 companies. 
This initiative will provide global employment opportunities to the youth of 
Maharashtra.
12. A separate fund will be allocated for startup seed 
funding , encouraging new entrepreneurs and 
their innovative ideas.
13. 50 state-of-the-art art studios will be 
established  across the state, providing content 
creators with the resources and infrastructure  
needed to produce high-quality content.
14. An alternative placement scheme  will be 
implemented to offer opportunities to 
candidates who have passed the written 
examination  in competitive exams but 
were not selected, allowing them to utilise 
their knowledge effectively.
29
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA15. The Maharashtra Olympic Training Academy  will be established in every division of 
Maharashtra, enabling the state’s athletes to succeed in international sports 
competitions.
16. Infrastructure will be provided to enhance the sports culture in Maharashtra .
a. A ‘Khelo Maharashtra’ initiative  will be launched across the State, modelled 
after the ‘Khelo India’ program , which will help identify and develop local talent.
b. Comprehensive health insurance and health cards will be made available to 
athletes , ensuring they receive free medical check-ups and necessary healthcare 
services.
c. Promoting the introduction of a  Bachelor in Sports Science  in colleges across 
the state, aiming to develop a skilled workforce of coaches, physiotherapists, 
and sports managers.
d. Establishing sports complexes in all Zilla Parishad (ZP) schools through the ‘Gaon 
Tithe Krida Kendra’  scheme.
17. To develop districts as sports centres  based on locally popular sports:
a. A world-class stadium will be built in Kolhapur  to establish it as a centre for 
football .
b. An ultra-modern hockey stadium  will be constructed in  Nanded  to achieve 
excellence in hockey.
18. We will establish a state-of-the-art Esports arena cum training centres  in Pune, 
Nagpur, Nashik and Chhatrapati Sambhaji Nagar, equipped with high-end technology.Sports
30MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
31
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA
Affordable and Accessible Healthcare
1. Under ‘Mission Swasth Maharashtra,’  public health facilities 
across the state will be strengthened to meet the growing 
demand for healthcare services by: 
a. Considering the increasing demand for healthcare services, the 
number of students in medical, nursing, and Diploma in Medical Laboratory 
Technology (DMLT) colleges in Maharashtra will be increased . 
b. Under the Ayushman Bharat and Mahatma Phule Jan Arogya Yojana, free 
medical treatment up to ₹5 lakhs will be provided to all .
c. PM Jan Aushadhi Kendras  will be established at every primary health centre 
and sub-centre to ensure affordable medicines are available to the public .
2. The number of hospitals included  under the  Ayushman Bharat scheme will be 
increased , ensuring beneficiaries have easy access to healthcare services and 
improved treatment options. 
3. Teleconsultation services will be provided across Maharashtra in collaboration 
with AIIMS, Nagpur, and the upcoming AIIMS, Pune . 
4. Free check-ups and medication  will be provided for lifestyle-related diseases such 
as hypertension, diabetes, and obesity . 
5. Under the Ayushman Bharat-Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY) , free 
health check-up camps for senior citizens and women  will be organised every six 
months at each Sub-centre.
OUR PROMISESHealthcare
MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
32Healthcare InfrastructureOUR PROMISES
6. Dhanwantari and Godavari Medicity, with 24 hospital buildings , will be established 
in Nagpur and Nanded , respectively. These facilities will have a total capacity of 
10,000 beds and all super-speciality Hospitals  in one location.
7. Advanced healthcare services for women and children:  Health facilities for women 
and children will be enhanced, with women and child hospitals equipped with 
maternity and newborn health services  made available in all districts.
8. By 2047, a commitment is made to eliminate Sickle Cell Anaemia from Maharashtra . 
The following steps will be taken:
a. Establishment of screening centers , facilities for the examination of pregnant 
women, and distribution of sickle cell identification cards .
b. Establishment of Sickle Cell Anaemia Research Centres as needed.
9. Blood supply services in Maharashtra will be expanded to ensure timely and 
sufficient blood availability for thalassemia patients . Furthermore, dedicated 
research institutions will be established to recommend modern and effective 
treatments for thalassemia.
10. By 2029, all rural hospitals in each taluka will 
be modernised  to include a two-bed 
dialysis unit, a four-bed ICU, and an 
operation theatre .
11. To achieve a tuberculosis-free 
Maharashtra and eliminate 
cataracts, free diagnosis and 
treatment camps  will be 
organised monthly in each 
district.
12. In recent times, the incidence of 
cancer has been increasing. Early 
diagnosis can help combat cancer. 
Therefore, free cancer screening 
33
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRAfacilities will be available at the taluka level, and state-of-the-art cancer diagnosis 
laboratories  will be established in each district.
13. All Primary Health Centers in tribal areas will have a Medical Mobile Unit  to deliver 
healthcare services to remote regions, ensuring last-mile healthcare delivery in 
remote tribal regions.
14. Digital de-addiction centres will be established in every district  across Maharashtra 
to help control new-age addictions like smartphones, online gambling, and gaming.
15. AYUSH treatment methods will be included and promoted in Maharashtra’s 
healthcare system .
a. Regulation and promotion of AYUSH-Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha, and 
Homeopathy will be implemented, along with establishing an independent 
framework for this purpose.
b. AYUSH health services will be gradually made available  in hospitals at the 
taluka level.
16. A State-level apex institution will be established  on the lines of the All India 
Institute of Ayurveda  to promote research, education, and treatment in Ayurveda 
in Maharashtra.
Ayush Arogya Maharashtra
MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
34
35
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA
Mahila Atma Nirbharta
Woman Changemakers1. Under the Ladki Bahin Yojana , financial assistance will be 
increased from ₹1,500 to ₹2,100  per beneficiary, and financial 
literacy training will also be provided  to strengthen their financial 
independence. Further, 25,000 women  will be inducted into the police 
force across Maharashtra.
2. Anganwadi workers and ASHA Sevaks  will receive a monthly honorarium of 
₹15,000 and insurance coverage to ensure their financial security and well-being.
3. Under the Mukhyamantri Annapurna Yojana , each family will receive three free 
gas cylinders annually . This initiative will continue in the future.
4. By 2027, 50 lakh lakhpati didis will be created in Maharashtra. To achieve this, an 
industrial cluster will be established for every 500 self-help groups , with an initial 
revolving fund of ₹1,000 crore.  
5. Considering the importance of UMED (Maharashtra State Rural Livelihoods 
Mission) in making women financially independent, UMED will be strengthened.
6. Permanent markets will be established  for women entrepreneurs and women’s 
self-help groups, and an annual  ‘Karmayogini Mela’  will be organised in each 
district.OUR PROMISESMahila Samman:  
Security, respect, and 
equality of opportunity 
will be ensured for all 
women in the state
MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
36Mahila Samman, Safety, And Facilities7. The following measures will be taken to strengthen women’s self-help groups in 
Maharashtra :
a. Financial assistance in the form of loans of ₹10 lakhs will be provided  to upgrade 
women’s self-help groups into MSMEs.
b. Interest-free loan s will be made accessible under the MUDRA scheme  to 
provide special incentives for women entrepreneurs.
c. The digitisation of women’s self-help groups  will be undertaken to establish 
strong relationships with banks, facilitating easier access to loans.
d. Dedicated cells for women’s self-help groups  will be established in each district 
and urban cooperative banks.
8. The ‘Rajmata Jijau Matri Vandana Award’  will be 
initiated to honour women who have excelled in 
social and political fields . 
9. State-of-the-art Ahilyabai Holkar women’s 
hostels  with robust security will be 
established at each district headquarters 
for female students and women 
professionals  from rural areas for 
education and business purposes. 
10. Based on the highly successful Tejaswini 
buses launched in Mumbai, special bus 
services for women  will be introduced in 
major cities  during peak hours to ensure safe and 
comfortable travel for female passengers. 
11. Vishakha Committees  will be established in all  educational institutions to prevent 
harassment  and discrimination against girls and women.OUR PROMISES
37
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRASenior Citizen Welfare
Divyang Welfare1. A ‘Senior Citizens First’  policy will be adopted, which includes:
a. Implementing Aadhaar Enabled Service Delivery (AESD)  to 
ensure automated services for every senior citizen.
b. For all senior citizens aged 80 and above , arrangements will be made to deliver 
requested documents -such as health records, identification papers, and 
pension-related documents- directly to their homes .
c. Establishing dedicated outpatient departments (OPDs)  for senior citizens in all 
Government hospitals.
2. The Old Age Pension  will be increased from ₹1,500 to ₹2,100 per month , providing 
greater financial security and dignity for senior citizens across Maharashtra.
3. At the taluka level, ‘Aaji Ajooba Parks’  will be established to provide recreational 
spaces for senior citizens .
4. Divyang Bhavans  will be established  in every district of the State to provide facilities 
for skill assessment, vocational guidance, and economic self-reliance for people 
with disabilities. 
5. These Divyang Bhavans will include awareness-raising Divyang Sensitisation Units  
to ensure respectful treatment of divyangs in society and specialised treatment 
rooms  to provide necessary care based on their requirements.
OUR PROMISES
Social  
Justice  
MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
386. Interest-free loans of up to ₹15 lakh  will be provided to entrepreneurs of Scheduled 
Caste, Scheduled Tribe, and other backward classes  for their business growth. 
7. To ensure that the respective categories fill all reserved Government  positions and 
remain unoccupied for long periods, walk-in interview campaigns  will be conducted 
every June and January, subject to regulations. 
8. A dedicated university named  ‘Aadi Krantikari Bhagwan Birsa Munda Tribal 
University’  will be established to conduct in-depth studies of tribal art, culture, 
lifestyle, customs, traditions, skills, and traditional knowledge. 
9. Sant Gadge Baba Hostels will be constructed in each district for OBC students. 
10. Student hostels for tribal students will be established  in Nagpur, Nashik, Mumbai, 
Chhatrapati Sambhaji Nagar, Pune, and Amravati.
11. Food and shelter  will be provided to all poor 
people  in the State.
12. Prices of essential items will be stabilised  
to ensure affordability and shield 
households across Maharashtra from 
market fluctuations.
13. Electricity bills will be reduced by 
30% , with a greater focus on solar 
and renewable energy sources .
14. Economic Development Corporations  
will be established to promote the 
advancement and development of 
various social groups as per their demands. OUR PROMISES
Antyodaya WelfareScheduled Castes (SCs), Scheduled Tribes (STs)  
and Other Backward Classes (OBCs)
39
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA15. The Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar Shram Safalya Awas Yojana  will be revived, granting 
home ownership rights to sanitation workers . 
16. Under the Akshay Anna Yojana, free rations , including rice, jowar, groundnut oil, 
salt, sugar, turmeric, mustard, cumin, and red chilli powder, will be provided monthly 
to families from low-income groups . 
17. In the next five years, housing will be provided to 36 lakh families . 
18. A welfare board  will be established for the unorganised workers in the supply sector 
of app-based companies.
19. Necessary measures will be taken for the welfare and respect of the transgender 
community .
Relief and Rehabilitation 
20. The 2013-14 Rehabilitation Act  will be effectively implemented. 
21. A committee  will be established to develop a comprehensive rehabilitation policy 
that addresses issues faced by affected individuals during the implementation of 
the assistance and rehabilitation policy and to define clear guidelines  for the 
assistance and rehabilitation processes.
22. Rehabilitated settlements will be integrated into the relevant local self-government 
institutions to ensure that residents receive essential services such as clean water, 
sanitation, electricity, healthcare, education, and infrastructure.
MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
40
41
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA
Law & Order
Good Governance1. A strict law will be enacted against forced and fraudulent 
conversions , ensuring protection from coercive and deceptive 
religious conversions.
2. Stringent laws and executive measures  will be implemented to repatriate 
illegal Bangladeshi and Rohingya  infiltrators and to prevent further infiltration 
into the State.
3. A Maha Police Bharti Abhiyan  will be launched to fill vacant positions  in the police 
department. Excellent housing facilities will be provided to all police personnel.
4. Within 100 days of forming the Government, we will present ‘Vision Maharashtra 
2029’ .
5. A time-bound program will be implemented to fill 3 lakh vacancies  in the 
administration over the next five years.
6. By using geospatial technology in the fields of urban planning and rural 
development , town planning will be executed more precisely.
7. The Maharashtra Government has enacted the Service Guarantee Act  to ensure 
that applicants receive Government services within a specified time frame. Under 
this law, applications received from women, youth, farmers, and senior citizens 
will be prioritised and resolved promptly.  OUR PROMISESGood 
Governance
and Public 
Administration
MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
428. To strengthen local self-governance institutions, the ‘Uttamrao Patil Training 
Institute’  will be established to train public representatives within these 
institutions. 1. संंवि�धाानाातीील तीर तीुदींंनाा संाक्षीी ठेेऊना महााराष्ट्राा ाती संमाना नाागरी काायदींा OUR PROMISES
43
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRARoad Transport Facility
Railway Transport Facility1. We will introduce the  ‘MahaGatiShakti’  initiative, integrating 
infrastructure projects from various State departments, such as 
roadways, ports, industrial corridors, and airports , to boost 
connectivity and competitiveness in Maharashtra.
2. Existing bus stations will be developed  and transformed into bus ports . This will 
include establishing facilities such as stages to promote local arts, cinemas for 
Marathi films, and farmers’ markets for local agricultural produce.
3. We will create over 5,000 kilometres of modern expressways, like the Mumbai-
Pune Expressway  and the Samruddhi Mahamarg. 
4. Efforts will be made to complete key railway routes such as Wardha-Yavatmal-
Nanded, Ahmednagar-Parli Vaijnath, Jalna-Jalgaon, Solapur-Tuljapur-Dharashiv, 
and Pune-Nashik .
5. Efforts will be made to introduce additional Vande Bharat and Amrit Bharat trains 
connecting Mumbai with Nagpur, Kolhapur, Nanded, and Latur.
6. With the cooperation of the Central Government, the Namo Bharat Regional Rapid 
Transport System (RRTS) will be developed , connecting the cities of Pune-Jalna 
and Pune-Nashik .OUR PROMISESInfrastructure
MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
44
Air Transport Facility
Water-ways Transport Facility7. Helipads will be constructed in every Taluka 
across Maharashtra to facilitate faster 
emergency services during medical 
emergencies.
8. Commercial Air Services will be expanded 
to 16 districts in Maharashtra. Additionally, 
efforts will be made to establish a runway 
in each district.
9. A ‘Water Metro’  will be launched on the lines of Kochi (Kerala), connecting the 
coastal cities and islands of Maharashtra  through fast waterways.
10. Fishing ports  in Alibag, Versova, Malvan, Arnala, and Uttan will be modernised .
45
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA
OUR PROMISESTransport and Infrastructure
Cleanliness and Waste Management1. By 2034, a total of 1,000 km metro network will be developed 
in cities such as Mumbai (MMR), Pune, Chhatrapati 
Sambhajinagar, Nagpur, and Nashik, revolutionising public 
transportation systems .
2. To facilitate the seamless use  of suburban rail transport, metro, monorail, urban 
bus services, taxis, rickshaws, and feeder rickshaws in the city, an integrated smart 
card scheme will be implemented .
3. With the goal of treating all sewage water by 2029 , the capacity of the existing 
systems will be enhanced, and new systems will be established as needed . 
Maharashtra will also be declared an open drainage-free State .
4. A comprehensive waste management initiative will be implemented in 
Maharashtra , which includes:  
a. Establishing the Maharashtra Waste Management Corporation  to oversee and 
regulate waste disposal and recycling processes statewide.
b. Eradicating the ‘Mountains of Trash’  by mandating the use of up to 8% plastic 
waste in road construction through the ‘Rags To Roads’ scheme.  
c.  To convert solid waste into electricity, Waste-to-Energy power plants will be 
established  across the State, starting with five major cities  in the first phase 
and gradually expanding to all major cities.OUR PROMISESUrban 
Development
MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
46
5. To make Maharashtra the cleanest state, the ‘Swachhata Vikas Abhiyan for 
Cleanliness and Hygiene (SWACH)’  will be launched:
a. A ‘Maha Swachhata Ranking’  will be initiated, and waste processing centres 
will be established in every city.
b. Competitions will be organised  for clean bus stations and clean Government 
hospitals.
c. Public toilets will be set up  at various locations as needed.
47
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA
OUR PROMISESOUR PROMISESRural 
Development
Digital Connectivity and Education
Sustainable Development and Environment
Local Governance and Community Empowerment1. We will ensure 100%  penetration of broadband internet 
connectivity in every village through BharatNet .
2. The Maharashtra Sarovar Samvardhan Yojana  will be launched statewide to 
rejuvenate water bodies at the village level, promote water conservation, and 
support local livelihoods.
3. In the next five years, under the PM Surya-Ghar Yojana , solar energy will be made 
available to 25% of households in every village .
4. Last rites have become a concern in many places in the state. Necessary measures 
will be taken to ensure that every deceased individual receives a dignified farewell .
MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
4849
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRAChhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj
1. Maharashtra is home to many ancient and historical forts, which 
symbolise the State’s glory and play a significant role in its 
historical and cultural development. To preserve and promote this 
heritage, a Fort Development Authority (FDA)  will be established.  
2. Government-recognised NGOs working to preserve forts will be encouraged, and 
enthusiasts like ‘Durg Sevaks’  and ‘Rakshaks’  will be officially recognised for their 
contributions. Dedicated committees will be formed for each fort to ensure 
focused attention on their upkeep.
3. A magnificent Maharashtra History Heritage Park  will be established in Pune, 
honouring the valour and legacy of the various empires in Maharashtra
a. This museum will feature facilities such as laser shows, war reenactments, and 
virtual reality experiences.
b. Additionally, cultural festivals celebrating Maharashtra’s heritage, including 
traditional music, dance, and art forms, will be organised.
4. To preserve the legacy of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj , we will establish:
a. A Smarak for Veer Shiva Kashid  on Panhala Fort.
b. A memorial for Sarkhel Kanhoji Angre and a Maratha Navy Museum  at 
Vijaydurg, Sindhudurg.
c. A world-class memorial-cum-museum of Bajirao Peshwa I will be established 
at his birthplace, Dubere, Nashik.OUR PROMISESCulture  
and Tourism 
MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
50
Marathi Language
Cultural Heritage and Preservation5. Maharashtra Diwas  will be celebrated with the participation of local Marathi 
people in all Indian embassies abroad and all Raj Bhavans in India, along with 
establishing a ‘Friends of Maharashtra’ network .
6. A three-day cultural festival  will be started at the headquarters of each district . It 
will showcase local traditions such as the Marathi language, Lavani, Bharud, and 
Powada from the respective regions.
7. The Marathi language  has recently been granted the status of a classical language . 
In this context, efforts will be made to strengthen Marathi language research 
institutions  and encourage in-depth study of the Marathi language through 
scholarships.
8. Substantial funding will be approved for the 
development of the Tuljabhavani Temple , and 
pilgrims will be provided with convenient 
travel facilities  by connecting this 
temple to major airports and railway 
stations. 
9. A Mahalaxmi Temple 
Redevelopment Plan  will be 
implemented to develop and expand 
the facilities of the historic 
Mahalaxmi Temple in Kolhapur . 
10. The Ghats of Godavari will be 
renovated  and infrastructure developed 
so that the Simhastha Kumbh Mela  can be 
held in Nashik-Trimbakeshwar in 2027 . 
11. A Divya Darshan Tourism Circuit  will be launched, 
including pilgrimage sites such as Trimbakeshwar, Panchvati, Saptashrungi, 
Someshwar, Navshya Ganapati, Mukti Dham, Shani Shingnapur, and Shirdi. 
51
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA
OUR PROMISES12. Restoration of temples over 400 years old  will be undertaken. 
13. To ensure the participation of the corporate world in the preservation of culture 
and heritage, a specified portion of CSR funds will be reserved for Corporate 
Cultural Responsibility (CCR) . 
14. Cultural committees will be established within local self-governance institutions  
in the State to promote local heritage sites, historical monuments, artisans, artists, 
and art forms, and relevant laws will be amended as necessary .
15. To honour Maharashtra’s spiritual and cultural heritage, we will:
a. Construct a memorial of Mahatma Basaveshwar  at Mangalvedha.
b. Construct a grand memorial honouring Sant Chokhamela  in his birthplace, 
Mehuna Raja Village, Bhandara.
c. Renovation and beautification of the Moraya Gosavi Samadhi area in Pimpri-
Chinchwad, Pune .
d. Establishment of the Namdev Maharaj Memorial  in Pandharpur.
e. Renovate the Biroba Temple in Arewadi, Sangli .
16. ‘Shri Vitthal Cultural Circuit’  will be established, connecting major Varkari 
pilgrimage sites such as Pandharpur, Alandi, 
Dehu, Paithan, Trimbakeshwar, Saswad, 
Muktainagar, Apegav, and Nevasa.
17. The Sarangakheda Chetak Festival 
of international prestige will promote 
Ashv Pradarshan  and Maharashtra’s 
culinary culture. 
18. Funding will be provided for the 
rejuvenation and conservation of the 
Mehruan Lake in Jalna district . 
19. A branch of the Lalit Kala Akademi  will be 
established in Maharashtra to promote various art 
forms and provide a dedicated platform for artists to 
showcase their skills.
20. A ₹ 300-crore  project to redevelop the Dikshabhumi in 
Nagpur and Chandrapur will be expedited for completion . 
MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
52
Tourism Development and Promotion21. A comprehensive plan  will be developed and implemented for the development of 
all Government and private museums  in Maharashtra. 
22. All facilities will be provided for pilgrims  visiting various pilgrimage sites on foot. 
23. A development tourism plan will be implemented , especially for youth, to facilitate 
visits to various development projects of the Central and State Governments and 
various service initiatives.
24. Gondhal, Dashavatari Khel  and similar traditional art forms, as well as the traditional 
craftsmanship of artisans, will be properly documented (pre-writing) and intellectual 
property rights (IPR) will be acquired, through which their original form will be 
protected from adulteration.
25. A scheme will be launched to train local youth as tourist guides and provide 
certification , making it mandatory for guides at historical sites, especially forts, to 
have certification . 
26. To offer systematic training in mountaineering, the ‘Tanaji Malusare Giryarohan 
Sanstha’  will be established in the State.
27. To promote tourism in Konkan, the ‘Come to Konkan’  initiative  will be launched. 
This initiative will encourage various forms of tourism, including coastal tourism, 
scuba diving, backwater tourism, eco-tourism, and food tourism .
28. The Kaas Plateau will be developed as an environmentally sustainable tourism 
destination , promoting eco-tourism that preserves its unique biodiversity while 
benefiting the environment and local communities.
53
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA
Forest and Wildlife Conservation
1. To prevent loss of life and property  caused by wildlife such as 
tigers, leopards, elephants, nilgai, wild boars, and monkeys in 
agricultural and human settlement areas, as well as to reduce human-
wildlife conflict, modern technologies like artificial intelligence (AI), 
drones, and radio collars  will be effectively utilised.
2. The ‘Ek Ped Maa Ke Naam’  initiative will be implemented effectively.
3. District Habitat Plans  will be developed in alignment with environmental goals, 
focusing on protecting ecosystems  and promoting the sustainable use of agriculture, 
water, and land resources in each district.
4. In all coastal cities of Maharashtra, a Mangrove Protection and Restoration 
Program will be initiated, including locals’ involvement in mangrove conservation 
and urban planning.  
5. Under the slogan ‘Sabse Bada Dhan, Jal aur Van,’  efforts will be made to promote 
the establishment of community-managed forests  to enhance the State’s green 
cover with local community participation. Additionally, Devrai  (sacred groves) will 
be preserved  to protect their unique biodiversity and cultural significance.  
6. Awards will be instituted at the district and taluka levels  to encourage individuals 
and organisations actively involved in forest conservation and environmental 
protection.OUR PROMISESEnvironment,    
Forest and 
Natural Resources
MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
54
7. Advanced cleaning technologies, including ‘Ro-Boat’  systems, will be employed to 
clean rivers in Maharashtra .  
8. Preventive measures  will be implemented to curb siltation in riverbeds  by using 
dense-growing grasses such as bamboo and vetiver.
Water, Land and Ecosystem Management
55
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRA
OUR PROMISESOUR PROMISES
1. Comprehensive urban development  in 
Mumbai will be achieved through the 
strict implementation of the 
Development Control Regulations 
(DCR) 2034 .
2. All MHADA  (Maharashtra Housing and 
Area Development Authority) colonies in 
Mumbai will be developed  through clusters 
over the next five years.
3. Efforts will be made to achieve a slum-free 
Mumbai through the effective implementation 
of the recently announced new housing policy .
4. A fleet of 12,000 EV buses will be added to the BEST service , ensuring eco-friendly and 
affordable travel for Mumbaikars.
5. A robust mechanism will be established  to ensure that all open spaces  (Government 
and Semi-Government) within the limits of all municipal corporations in the Mumbai 
Metropolitan Region remain free from encroachments .
6. The Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar Shram Safalya Awas Yojana  will be reinstated. Sanitation 
workers in Mumbai  and all urban local bodies will be granted home ownership rights .
7. A significant number of flyovers have been constructed in the Mumbai Metropolitan 
Region. Turf facilities will be developed underneath these flyovers , making previously 
unused open spaces available for sports activities.
8. The Vande Metro service  will be launched to connect Mumbai with nearby cities , 
significantly reducing travel time and bringing surrounding cities closer to 
Mumbai.
9. A ‘Water Metro’  will be initiated on the lines of Kochi (Kerala), 
connecting coastal cities and islands  through environment 
friendly water routes, utilising electric boats (EVs) . This will 
help reduce the strain on the transportation system in 
Mumbai . 
10. By establishing multi-storey automated parking systems in 
urban areas of Maharashtra, parking and traffic issues will be 
addressed. 
11. To prevent ‘waterlogging’ in cities  during monsoons, a Smart 
Drainage System  will be implemented in Mumbai and all major 
cities.
Mumbai 
Metropolitan 
Region
MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
56NOTES
MAHARASHTRA ASSEMBLY ELECTIONS 2024
58NOTES
59
BHARATIYA JANATA PARTY SANKALP PATRABHARATIYA JANATA PARTY
MAHARASHTRA
BJP HQ, CDO Barracks 1, Opp LIC Office,  
Nariman Point, Mumbai-400021
Press the lotus button Make BJP win
