MaharashtraNama
Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसLegacy of 
Ideals
Path of 
Struggle
।। Maharashtra Dharma ।।Commitment to the ConstitutionA Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!4  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
Pref Ace 
We believe that providing a high quality of life for every person in Maharashtra and preserving 
its self-respect is the essence of Maharashtra Dharma. When our dignity is compromised 
and public welfare neglected, we cannot remain passive—decisive action becomes a necessity. The upcoming Maharashtra Legislative Assembly Election is such a moment of action. In the recent Lok Sabha election, the people of Maharashtra voted to uphold Maharashtra Dharma, sending a clear message. Now, in this Assembly election, a decisive mandate is essential. To 
understand why this vote is crucial, we need to reflect on the past five years in Maharashtra.
Two and a half years ago, the Mahayuti government took power in Maharashtra through 
defection, theft of party symbols, MLA poaching and inciting divisions within families. This 
government, led by forces outside Maharashtra, has shown little regard for the state’s welfare. 
Following their setback in the Lok Sabha election, the Mahayuti government began to feel the 
discontent of the people. On the eve of elections, they have resorted to tactics to mislead and appease the public, with a barrage of ordinances and a flood of promises. Meanwhile, the people 
of Maharashtra are facing rising inflation, unemployment, violence against women and girls and 
the plight of farmers. This indifferent, insensitive and corrupt government has, unfortunately, even failed to honour Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj’s legacy. Bringing about change in this government is essential for the future and welfare of Maharashtra.
The Maha Vikas Aghadi is committed to working tirelessly to restore Maharashtra’s 
pride, uphold its dignity and re-establish Maharashtra Dharma. We are determined to bring a government inspired by the ideologies of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj, Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj, Mahatma Jyotiba Phule and Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar. This resolve is reflected in 
our manifesto, Maharashtra Nama, which we present to the people. The year 2030 will mark 
the 400th birth anniversary of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj. As we celebrate this landmark year, we pledge to govern with a people-centred approach, as envisioned by Chhatrapati Shri 
Shivaji Maharaj. Maharashtra’s progress will be built on five core pillars: Agriculture and Rural 
Development, Industry and Employment, Urban and City Development, Environment and Public Welfare. This Maharashtra Nama embodies that vision.
Jai Maharashtra!
Mallikarjun Kharge
 Sharad Pawar
 Uddhav ThackerayHealthy 
Maharashtra
Entrepreneurial 
Maharashtra
Biodiversity-Rich
Maharashtra
Inclusive 
Maharashtra
Vibrant,Urban 
Maharashtra
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसA Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!        
In the First 100 Days...
Pawar, Gandhi and Thackeray’s Commitment
Women
  A monthly allowance of Rs. 3,000 
will be provided to women under the 
Mahalaxmi Scheme.
  Free travel on buses for women.
  Six cooking gas cylinders will be 
provided annually at Rs. 500 each.
  Framing a ‘Nirbhay Maharashtra’ 
policy and enforcement of the ‘Shakti’ law for the safety of women 
and children.  Free cervical cancer vaccines will be 
given to all girls aged 9 to 16.
  Two optional leave days for female 
employees during menstruation.
  Establishment of a separate 
department for the empowerment of self-help groups.
  Formation of a dedicated Ministry 
for Child Welfare.
  Rs. 1,00, 000 to be provided to girls 
upon reaching 18 years of a ge.
6  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
The United Nations has established 17 Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs), which include poverty eradication, good health and overall well-being, quality education and social and gender equality. The Maha Vikas Aghadi is fully committed to implementing these goals.1Xm[aÐç{Z‘y©bZ
5b¢{JH$ 
g‘mZVm 6ewÕ nmUrnwadR>m Am{U gm§S>nmÊ`mMm `mo½` {ZMam
7Anma§n[aH$ D$Om©òmoVm§nmgyZ amñV XamV drO 8amoOJmamÀ`m ‘w~bH$ g§Ytgh `mo½` Am{W©H$ {dH$mg
9^¸$‘ nm`m^yV gw{dYm, CÚmoJm§Mo Omio Am{U Zd{Z{‘©Vrg MmbZm 10gm‘m{OH$ g‘mZVm
11emídV g‘wXm` Am{U emídV ehao
15^yMam§Mr gwajm2Cnmg‘marMr g‘már
12O~m~XmarZo CËnmXZ Am{U dmna
16em§VVmnyU© dmVmdaU, Ý`mæ` dmJUyH$ Am{U ^¸$‘ gmd©O{ZH$ g§ñWm3CÎm‘ Amamo½` Am{U gdmªJrU ñdmñÏ`  
13hdm‘mZ~Xbmdarb H¥$Vrg AZwg‘W©Z
17emídV {dH$mg C{Ôï>nyVugmR>r {d{dY KQ>H$m§Mo ghH$m`©4XO}Xma {ejU    
14ObMam§Mr gwajm17
"g§`wº$ amï´>m'Zo nwT>rb n§Yam dfmªgmR>r 17 emœV 
{dH$mg C{Ôï>o {Z{üV Ho$br AmhoV. g‘mOmVrb 
àË`oH$ KQ>H$mMm {dH$mg Am{U emídV 
{dH$mgmÀ`m {XeoZo OmÊ`mMm {ZYm©a H$aUmè`m `m 
C{Ôï>m§À`m A§‘b~OmdUrgmR>r H$m±J«og-amï´>dmXr 
H$m±J«og nyU©nUo dMZ~Õ Amho. emœV  
{dH$mg C{Ôï>o
13        
Farmers
  Debt waiver for farmers up to  
Rs. 3,00,000; a Rs. 50,000 incentive 
for regular loan repayment.
  A re view will be conducted to 
improve existing schemes and provide support for widows and children in families affected by 
farmer suicides.
  The government is committed 
to ensuring minimum support 
prices for farmers and will simplify 
the crop insurance scheme by removing burdensome conditions.
Youth and Education
  Unemployed educated graduates 
and diploma holders will receive up to Rs. 4,000 per month in allowances.
  Recruitment for 2,50,000 positions 
in the state government will commence.
  Establishment of a ‘Youth 
Commission’ for youth welfare.  Scholarship funds provided 
through BARTI, Mahajyoti and Sarathi schemes to be doubled.
  MPSC (Maharashtra Public Service 
Commission) exam schedules will be announced, with results declared within 45 days.
  A Unified Smart Card will be provided, allowing candidates to pay the exam fee once and take all government exams under MPSC 
throughout the year.
  A single fee will be charged for  
all MPSC exams.
Healthcare
  The Mahatma Phule Jan Arogya 
Scheme will be extended to cover all diseases, including accidents.
  Various Health Insurance schemes 
will be reviewed and will further 
expand healthcare facilities.
  Free medicines will be made 
available in government hospitals.A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!
Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  7  
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसA Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!8  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
Industry and Business
   A new industrial policy will be 
framed.
   A dedicated Ministry for Micro, Small 
and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) 
will be established. 
   Small shopkeepers and businesses 
will be charged with domestic electricity rates.
Social Justice
  Caste-based census to be conducted 
in Maharashtra.
  A law will be framed to ensure that 
the allocated budgets for Scheduled Castes and Tribal departments are utilised within the set timeframe.
  Each newly announced corporation 
representing various social groups will immediately receive an initial fund of Rs. 100 crore.
  A Welfare Corporation will be 
established for organised and unorganised sanitation workers.  Income limit for the Sanjay Gandhi 
Niradhar Scheme to increase from 
Rs. 21,000 to Rs. 50,000, with 
benefits rising from Rs. 1,500 to  
Rs. 2,000 per month.
People’s Welfare 
  Immediate measures to control 
prices of essential goods will be taken. 
  Monthly waiver of up to 100 units 
on electricity bills for consumers using up to 300 units.
  The prepaid electricity meter 
scheme will be reviewed in consideration of consumer opposition.
  Restoration of the old pension 
scheme for government employees.
  Honorariums for senior artists will 
be increased.
  Increase in Shiv Bhojan Thali 
scheme centres.
8  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसA Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  9  
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
Urban Development
  A ‘State Urban Commission’ to address 
the challenges of urbanisation and provide strategic direction will be established
  An authority to address climate 
change threats and implement necessary measures will be created.
Good Governance
  Timetables for local self-government 
elections will be announced.
  These elections will be conducted 
using a single-member ward system.
  Pending allowances and honorarium 
for Gram Panchayat members, 
sarpanches, and deputy sarpanches 
to be released.
Pride of Maharashtra 
  Online and offline courses to teach Marathi to Maharashtrians 
abroad and non-native speakers in 
Maharashtra will be initiated.   Action plan to complete the 
pending Bharat Ratna Dr. 
Babasaheb Ambedkar Memorial at 
Chaityabhoomi, Dadar (Indu Mill) 
within set deadlines. 
  Ordinances issued by the Mahayuti 
government from a partisan perspective will be reconsidered.
  Orders issued by the Mahayuti government regarding land allocations to private institutions and individuals will be reviewed.
  Strong demand to the central 
government for awarding Bharat 
Ratna to Krantisurya Mahatma 
Phule, Lokshahir Annabhau Sathe 
and Karmaveer Bhaurao Patil.
Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  9  
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसA Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!Mission  
2030
Women
   Provide loans up to Rs. 5,00,000 at 
low-interest rate.
   Establish a dedicated department under the Ministry of Women and 
Child Welfare for self-help groups.
   Ensure strict enforcement of the 
‘Shakti’ law.
   Establish a ‘Nirbhay Maharashtra’ where every woman and girl can 
live a fearless life. Initiate lessons 
in self-defense.  
   Set up safe, clean and conveniently located public restrooms for 
women.
   Develop a roadmap for 
implementing the concept of safe 
cities for women, children, senior 
citizens and the disabled.Farmers 
  Implement the ‘Maharashtra 
Millet Mission’ to safeguard 
farmers and address climate 
challenges.
  Set milk prices annually, 
considering production costs for 
dairy farmers.
  Introduce Pink and Saffron 
Revolution to protect onion and tomato cultivators.
  Establish an independent 
Directorate for dryland farming.
  Allocate funds for the 
rehabilitation of degraded lands 
and update records.
  Develop permanent, graveled 
roads connecting farms to make 
access easier for farmers, with an 
allocation of Rs. 10,000 crore for road development.
10  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
The Constitution guarantees every citizen in the country social and  
economic justice. The United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals 
also emphasise comprehensive development for every individual.  
Achieving this requires taking decisive action across various fronts and moving in the right direction. With a vision for Maharashtra in 2030, we pledge to advance toward these goals.
  Gradually reduce the population 
dependent on agriculture by 
creating alternative employment 
opportunities.
Youth and Education 
  Create jobs for 1.25 million  
unemployed individuals over the 
next five years.
  Launch ‘Maharashtra Youth 
Employment Mission’ to provide 
updated information on job 
opportunities in various sectors domestically and internationally.
  Promote a ‘Maharashtra Olympic 
Mission’ to elevate Maharashtra’s 
standing in sports.
  Aim to make Maharashtra 
addiction-free, using art and 
sports therapy to achieve this goal.
  Introduce a New Education Policy 
for Maharashtra.  Gradually increase the budget for 
education to reach 6%.
  Strengthen laws against exam 
paper leaks.
  Conduct recruitment processes 
for key departments through 
MPSC, increasing its efficiency 
with additional members and staff.
  Introduce topics related to social 
responsibility and constitutional 
awareness in school curriculum to 
foster responsible citizenship. 
Healthcare 
  Adopt a policy for universal 
healthcare rights by  
strengthening public health  
services.
  Equip district hospitals with full 
facilities to ensure easy access to healthcare services.
Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  11  A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!12  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
  Aim to raise the average lifespan 
in Maharashtra to 77 years while 
ensuring good health.
  Implement a comprehensive 
programme to control the spread 
of malaria dengue, chikungunya 
and tuberculosis (TB)
  Increase public participation and 
transparency in healthcare to 
make it more accountable.
  Gradually raise the healthcare 
budget to 8% as per national 
health policy.
  Set up enough recreation centers 
for senior citizens.
  Introduce ‘Sanman Scheme’ to 
support senior citizens and ensure 
that physically and mentally 
vulnerable seniors receive essential government services directly at their homes, upholding 
their dignity and respect.
  Will ensure that disabled, margin-
alised and LGBTQIA+ become a 
part of the mainstream.  Industry and Employment 
  Restore Maharashtra’s per capita 
income and industrial standing.
  Achieve a 12% growth rate in 
industry and a 15% growth rate in 
the service sector.
  Provide Rs. 1 crore in funding for 
innovative startups.
  Establish exclusive industrial 
zones for women entrepreneurs.
  Offer Rs. 1 crore grants to 
entrepreneurs from OBC, SC, ST 
and VJNT communities.
  Open special offices in Europe, 
the USA, the Gulf and East Asia 
to attract foreign investment in 
Maharashtra.
  Promote a ‘Work from Hometown’ policy.
  Will ensure a social protection  
for gig workers. A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  13  
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
  Repeal the government order 
allowing contract-based 
employment in government services.
  Reject the four labour codes  
imposed by the Modi government in 
the state.
Urban Development 
  Develop ‘Happy Cities’ across the 
state encompassing public par -
ticipation, parks, playgrounds and clean public spaces.
  Strive for a clean, green and 
pollution-free Maharashtra.
  Establish a ‘Sustainability Cell’ dedicated to achieving net-zero 
emissions in the cities. 
  Formulate policies to address 
urban climate change impacts, 
such as unprecedented rainfall, 
flooding and rising temperatures.
  Address traffic issues by 
prioritising public transportation 
and creating multi-modal 
facilities, along with provisions for p
edestrians and cyclists.  Incorporate a large number of electric vehicles for public 
transportation in Pune, 
Mumbai, Nagpur, Nashik, Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar and 
Amravati by 2030.
  Extend the ‘SRA’ scheme to 
large towns and talukas near 
cities.
  Enforce a commitment to 
provide ‘Housing for All’ in the 
state.
  Enact laws to protect hills 
from encroachments and 
preserve their integrity.
  Expand Maharashtra’s current 
forest cover from 17% to 25% 
with a focus on urban forest 
expansion.
  Emphasise the conservation of Satpuda and Sahyadri ranges, 
rivers, streams, lakes, forests, 
grasslands and biodiversity, including animals, birds and 
insects.A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!14  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
  Establish an independent 
Forestry University.
  Launch a ‘Mission Saksham’ to 
enhance the capacities of local 
government representatives 
and officials.
Social Justice 
  While elevating Maharashtra to 
the top rank in per capita in-
come, we aim to improve the 
state’s Human Development 
Index.
  In line with the vision of  
Shri. Kanshi Ram ji, the leader of 
the oppressed, ‘Representation 
based on numbers,’ we will rectify the confusion 
surrounding Maratha, Dhangar, 
Muslim etc. reservations created during the Mahayuti 
government’s tenure, ensuring 
justice for these groups.  Implementing affirmative policies to increase SC, ST, OBC 
and minority representation 
in technology and industrial sectors.
  Make essential food items like cooking oil and tur dal available 
on ration cards, benefiting 
holders of orange ration cards.
  Launch a Health and Nutrition 
Mission specifically for the tribal 
community.
  Expand the ‘Bharosa Cell’ across the state to help resolve family 
disputes and strengthen family 
systems.
  Formulate an inclusive policy to ensure opportunities for 
differently-abled and LGBTQIA+ 
individuals across all sectors.A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  15  
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
Pride of Maharashtra 
  Introduce policies to augment 
the stature of the Marathi  
language.
  Prioritise the resolution of the 
border dispute for Marathi-
speaking communities in the 
Karnataka border areas.
  Conserve and maintain 39 forts and historical heritage sites under the jurisdiction of the 
Maharashtra government.
  Introduce the ‘Maharashtra 
Majha’ tag based on the 
‘Geographical Indication’  
(GI) concept.
  Accelerate the development 
plans for Sant Peeths  
(centres of saints).
  Develop the Dr. Babasaheb 
Ambedkar Corridor, including all 
villages visited by Dr. Ambedkar 
in Maharashtra.People’s Welfare 
  Foster an accountable and trans -
parent government that actively 
encourages public participation, 
empowering citizens to engage in 
decision-making processes and  
contribute to policies that impact their communities.
  Audit meters and renegotiate electricity contracts to control high 
electricity rates from private power 
companies.
  Prioritise non-conventional energy 
production, such as solar power, 
wind energy and biogas from waste, 
making Maharashtra the top state in renewable energy in the country.
  Complete diversion bunds urgently; once local water needs are met, divert 
additional water to deficit areas. 
Complete the Wainganga to Nalganga river-linking project urgently.
  Doubling the Konkan railway line.
  Complete the pending work on the Mumbai-Goa highway within a 
stipulated timeframe.
  Promote tourism policies that are 
eco-friendly and generate jobs. A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!
16  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसThe United Nations has set 17 
Sustainable Development Goals for 
2030. The Maha Vikas Aghadi is fully 
committed to implementing these 
goals, aimed at advancing every 
sector of society and promoting 
sustainable development.
17 
Sustainable 
Development Goals
A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!
Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  17  
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
Agriculture and  
Rural DevelopmentIndustry and 
Employment
Environment
Urban and City 
Development
People’s Welfare
A Bright Maharashtra...  
A Leading Maharashtra!The 
Development  
Panchasootri 
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसPolicies  
  We will establish a concrete programme for drought eradication 
and compensation for losses due to heavy rainfall, considering the state’s natural and geographical conditions, available resources and 
climate changes.
  Promote sustainable farming and raise awareness of the impacts 
of climate change.
  Prepare an annual report on drought and create an actionable plan.
  Farmers often face recurring natural disasters. We will prepare a contingency plan to support them.
  Implement the ‘Gorewala Committee’ recommendation to waive the loans automatically in the fourth year if crops have been damaged for three consecutive years due to drought or natural calamities.
  Follow the Reserve Bank’s guidelines to extend repayment terms for crop loans when farmers incur losses due to natural calamities.
  Establish a Directorate for Dryland Agriculture to support the development of rainfed farming, which is predominant in the state.
  Introduce crop insurance schemes for fruits like kokum, jackfruit, banana, coconut, areca nut and jamun and include sugarcane and other cash crops under crop insurance.Agriculture and 
Rural Development
18  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024  Devise a comprehensive policy to boost fruit processing in Konkan 
and orange processing in Vidarbha.
  Consider village-level units instead of groups or talukas for crop insurance.
  Increase the proportion of farmers and land area benefiting from insurance schemes.
  Make available crop-wise data on availability, demand and supply. Based on the model of the US Department of Agriculture, prepare monthly reports on demand and supply for essential food grains 
and major horticultural crops.
  Adopt policies to break the monopoly of market committees, 
encourage contract farming, direct sales, private markets, online spot and futures markets and promote private investment.
  Abolish the cess outside the purview of market committees.
  Include private institutions and traders in the state procurement of agricultural produce.
  Introduce a dairy revitalisation policy for Maharashtra’s white revolution.
  Set up a separate tribunal, akin to labour courts and MAT, to enable farmers to seek justice against grievances.
  Formulate policies to encourage farmers towards organic farming, goat rearing, beekeeping, mushroom farming, medicinal plant cultivation, floriculture and hydroponics.
  Press for the implementation of the ‘Swaminathan Commission’ recommendations with the central government.
  Control the prices of seeds and encourage the preservation of indigenous varieties.
  Encourage organic farming and develop a market for organic produce.
  Utilise advanced technologies like satellite imaging to expedite damage assessment processes for agricultural losses due to natural 
calamities, ensuring timely surveys and compensations.  Advocate for the 
removal of GST on farming equipment.
  Implement measures 
to mitigate the 
problem of wild 
animal intrusions damaging crops.
र
Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  19  
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस20  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Assembly Elections 2024
Infrastructure  
  We will promote micro-warehouses and cold storage facilities.
  Provide grants for large warehouses to Farmer Producer Companies 
(FPCs).
  Establish systems to enable value addition and processing of agricultural produce, including fruit processing, at the village level to create local employment.
  Make spaces available in cities for consumer markets to sell vegetables, fruits and other farm produce.
  Spread scientifically-backed crop techniques for millet varieties like jowar and bajra and other pulses, while creating forward linkages by supporting processing industries.
  Set up a cotton research centre in Marathwada.
  Implement a policy to establish 100 textile mills in cotton-growing regions, focusing on producing textiles where cotton is grown, to create substantial employment opportunities.
  Develop a network of modern soil testing laboratories.
Agriculture-Related Industries  
  We will encourage dairy farming, poultry farming, fisheries, goat rearing, beekeeping, medicinal plant collection and commercial bamboo cultivation.
  Provide a strategic framework and infrastructure to support the production of value-added dairy products such as milk powder, paneer, ghee and butter.
  Implement immediate measures to address issues in the dairy sector, including direct subsidies to farmers, incentives for milk powder exports, creation of a milk powder buffer stock, inclusion of milk powder in school nutrition and Anganwadi schemes and 
the supply of milk powder to underprivileged countries in place of 
financial aid.  Commit to bringing all 
sugarcane cultivation 
under drip irrigation, 
aiming to save 10% of water usage without 
compromising 
production.
  Fund research by ICRISAT to enhance 
the productivity of 
traditional crops.
  Procure electricity from the open market 
to provide farmers 
with daytime power supply.
  Provide the required agricultural 
labour through 
the Employment Guarantee Scheme.
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसFair Prices for Agricultural Produce  
  Advocate with the central government to secure profitable prices 
for pulses such as tur, gram and urad.
  Urge for an increase in government procurement of oilseeds, pulses and other crops beyond wheat and rice, ensuring they receive a minimum support price.
  Formulate policies to enable higher returns for farmers growing oilseeds like soybean, sunflower, groundnut, as well as cotton.
  Provide a guaranteed price of Rs. 3,000 per quintal along with a bonus of Rs. 500 for paddy (rice) in the districts of Wardha, Bhandara, 
Gondia, Gadchiroli, Chandrapur and Nagpur in Eastern Vidarbha.
Credit Support  
  Develop a system to ensure regular, timely and adequate credit 
supply for agriculture.
  Advocate with the Reserve Bank to extend the same lending criteria to farmers as applied to other industries, where loans are given up to 70% of the asset’s valuation.
  End the current practice of mortgaging the entire farmland for any agricultural loan. Instead, determine the collateral area based on the required loan amount and only take that portion as collateral.
  Distribute Kisan Credit Cards to women farmers.
Water  
  Allocate significant budget provisions to address irrigation backlogs 
in Vidarbha, Marathwada, North Maharashtra and Konkan regions.
  Develop a programme to enhance the water-carrying capacity of old and outdated canals.
  Encourage farmers to remove silt from large, medium and minor irrigation projects and percolation tanks and apply it to their fields.
  Formulate an eco-friendly policy for water development and management.
  Computerise the irrigation management system.
  Bring 100% of sugarcane and banana cultivation under  
micro-irrigation.
  Provide 100% subsidy for drip and sprinkler irrigation systems.Maharashtra 
Millet Mission
  Launch an independent 
‘Maharashtra Millet Mission’ to promote 
the importance of 
millets. Under this initiative, announce minimum support prices for millets like jowar, bajra, ragi, 
varai, rale and rajgira, 
encouraging greater millet production and allowing dryland farmers to grow two to 
three crops.
  Short-duration millet 
crops will help mitigate the risk to crops and 
farmers from natural 
calamities due to climate change.
  Promote healthy eating by encouraging the inclusion of millet-
based foods in diets.
  Integrate millet 
products into midday meal schemes, 
providing nutritious 
food options for students.
Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  21   
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस  Create a policy to protect the interests of water-scarce regions 
amid conflicts such as tail-end vs head, flow vs lift irrigation, upper 
vs lower dams, urban vs rural, irrigated vs non-irrigated and regional 
imbalances.
  Set cropping patterns based on water availability.
  Prevent unscientific water conservation practices.
  Prepare and implement a comprehensive plan for groundwater management, groundwater recharge and groundwater use through 
public participation.
  Impose a complete ban on indiscriminate sand extraction from river 
beds.
  Advocate with the Water Resources Department to preserve the agricultural water quota.
  Develop and enforce regulations related to irrigation laws.
  Restrict the commodification of water.
  Provide subsidies for plastic linings for farm ponds.
Technology  
  Launch a comprehensive programme to modernise agriculture and empower the agricultural workforce with advanced technology.
  Encourage startups in the agricultural sector.
  Promote new employment opportunities in agriculture through the 
use of Artificial Intelligence (AI).
Rural Development  
  Develop a Development Plan (DP) for the planned and sustainable 
growth of villages through active participation of all village 
stakeholders, with periodic reviews for implementation.
  Boost agri-tourism, rural tourism and nature tourism to provide 
farmers with additional income sources and create jobs in rural 
areas.
  Implement a policy to provide single-phase DP electricity 
connections to all applicants.
  Plan to ensure access to clean drinking water for every village within the next five years.
  Implement underground or covered drainage systems in villages with populations exceeding 10,000.Pink and 
Saffron 
Revolution
Maharashtra is 
the largest onion-
producing region in 
India and also leads in tomato production. 
The prices of these 
crops are highly 
volatile, often sold at 
extremely low rates. We are committed to 
setting a minimum 
support price for onions and tomatoes 
to stabilise their 
value. We will also help promote onion 
and tomato-based 
processing industries. 
We believe this will 
bring about a Pink (onion) and Saffron 
(tomato) Revolution 
in Maharashtra.
22  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस  Relax the criteria for establishing primary health centres to a 
population of 10,000 in remote, hilly and tribal areas and 20,000 
in other areas, from the current limits of 20,000 and 30,000, 
respectively.
  Increase the number of well-equipped 108 ambulance services to 2,000.
  Implement afforestation programmes on fallow land, with an audit system for tree plantation.
  Ensure effective and transparent implementation of the Employment Guarantee Scheme.
  Develop bypass roads in all talukas.
  Allocate budget provisions to pave and maintain farm access roads for year-round use.
  Introduce a water grid scheme to ensure ample drinking water supply per capita in talukas of Marathwada with rainfall below 30%.
  Plan to channel the surplus water from Koyna to benefit Konkan.
  Provide employment opportunities for rural youth and offer financial assistance for those interested in entrepreneurship.
  Reimplement the ‘Sant Gadge Baba Village Cleanliness Scheme’ and the ‘Mahatma Gandhi Dispute-Free Campaign.’
Fisheries and Fisherfolk  
  Abolish the royalty imposed on fisherfolks 
  Establish the ‘Jatiram Barve Fisherfolk Development Corporation’ to ensure the holistic development of the fisherfolk community by 
providing them with modern technology and improved marketing 
opportunities.
  Offer low-interest loans to support fisherfolk.
  Set up ‘Fish Production Marketing Committees’ in every district, along with cold storage and processing centres.
  Pass the ‘Maharashtra Fisheries and Aquaculture Act’ to preserve marine biodiversity and promote the conservation of marine life 
alongside fishing.
  Freshwater fishing cooperatives will be granted leases without 
royalty fees.
Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  23  A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!24  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
Urban and City Development
  Happy Cities Initiative: Social harmony and a high standard of 
living are essential prerequisites for happy cities. To achieve this, 
modern cities must integrate efficient transportation, quality 
education and healthcare services, a sense of security, confidence in growth opportunities, refreshing greenery, open spaces and 
playgrounds, entertainment centres, and preservation of heritage 
sites. We are committed to developing the best happy cities where every section of society, including women, seniors, children, and 
persons with disabilities, has a place.
  Programmes will be devised to audit each city’s infrastructure 
capacity and assess future needs for organised, well-planned 
urban growth.
  A ‘State Urban Commission’ will be set up to drive advanced,  
eco-friendly, and progressive urban planning. This commission will 
focus on enhancing the quality of life for urban residents, making 
cities financially strong and capable of addressing global warming.A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  25  
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
  A framework will be created to regulate construction and develop 
infrastructure in villages surrounding large cities, with a focus on 
sustainable development. 
  We will prioritise affordable housing and essential amenities to 
improve the quality of life for slum residents.
  We will ensure clean and equitable water to all. 
  Substantial funds will be allocated for 100% waste processing (including wet, dry, e-waste, bio-waste, and construction waste), 
with decentralised collection and processing centres.
  Cities will aim to treat 100% of sewage, with substantial budget 
allocations for sewage treatment plants (STPs) and policies to 
reuse treated water.
  Plans will be developed for fully equipped public toilets in urban 
areas.
  Public transportation will be made safer, faster, and more comfortable while ensuring it remains environmentally sustainable.
  Infrastructure for cyclists and pedestrians will be enhanced, with a focus on making public transport more efficient through 
technology.
  Electric vehicles will be integrated into public bus fleets, and last-
mile connectivity will be improved.
  In line with the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2021-2030, a comprehensive approach will be adopted to reduce road 
accidents, with better road designs, strict enforcement of laws, 
and emergency medical services.
  Residents will be encouraged to grow vegetables on balconies, terraces, and backyards, fostering urban farming.A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!26  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
  Policies will be developed to conserve significant historical, 
natural, and unique city landmarks, with an aim to boost 
tourism.
  The arbitrary and haphazard UDCPR applied across 
Maharashtra’s cities will be reviewed and appropriate steps 
will be taken to stop the inorganic growth of the cities. Each 
city’s unique characteristics and capacity will be preserved democratically.
  Each municipal corporation will have a ‘Town Planner’ position to draft long-term development plans, filled by 
professionals trained in urban planning.
  Reports from the State Finance Commission and the Action 
Taken Report will be made public on the government’s 
website, while municipal budgets and audits will be published 
on their respective websites annually.
A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
Clean  
Rivers  
in Cities 
Leading water experts 
in the state assert that 
it is time to prioritise 
river health along with human health. 
Accordingly, mapping 
of all springs will be 
initiated. For ideal water 
management, we are adopting a policy to use 
70% of the tax collected 
from water charges for sewage treatment. 
Under this, we are 
determined to establish sewage treatment 
plants (STPs) in 131 cities 
across the state in the 
first phase. Incomplete 
sewage treatment projects will be 
completed immediately 
and malfunctioning projects will be repaired 
and operated at full 
capacity.Climate Change 
  With global warming concerns, cities will be required 
to review their current status and create roadmaps to 
manage rising temperatures and reduce carbon emissions.
  Focus will be on controlling emissions by reviewing carbon 
sources, expanding green cover with parks and urban 
forests, conserving biodiversity, promoting eco-friendly 
constructions, encouraging green roofs, implementing rainwater harvesting, and mandating waste and sewage 
treatment.
  Every city development project will undergo sustainability assessments. A ‘Sustainability Cell’ will be established in 
each city.
Urban Health  
  Strong measures will be taken to prevent and eradicate diseases like tuberculosis, AIDS, malaria, dengue, and 
chikungunya, with provisions for free medicines, increased 
recruitment in the health department, and more 24-hour clinics.
  Dedicated healthcare services will be established in major cities for lifestyle diseases like cancer, diabetes, heart 
disease, stroke, and respiratory conditions.
  Special attention will be given to maternal and child health, 
with expanded vaccination programmes and effective 
family planning and reproductive health services.
Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  27   
A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!28  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
Special Focus  
  Efforts will be made to allow girls to complete primary 
and secondary education in the same school to reduce 
dropout rates.
  A comprehensive network of CCTV cameras with AI-
enabled surveillance will monitor safety concerns in 
urban areas.
  A thorough review of municipal governance rules will 
be conducted, identifying issues and recommending 
necessary amendments to enhance efficiency.
  The ‘Saksham’ initiative will train local government 
officials and elected representatives on municipal 
laws, constitutional duties, various schemes, and best 
practices from other cities.
  Local body elections, mandated by the 74th Constitutional Amendment, will be conducted 
promptly using a single-member ward system.
  A study group will be formed to explore the feasibility 
of a Municipal Cadre, and actions will be taken if the 
idea is viable.
A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  29   
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
Industry and 
Employment
Industry  
  To restore Maharashtra’s declining reputation in the industrial 
sector caused by the mismanagement of the Mahayuti government and to reclaim its top position in the country, we will implement a new industry policy focused on employment generation and worker welfare. This policy will prioritise attracting foreign investment, boosting exports and promoting micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs).
  Establish a dedicated ministry for micro and small industries  
in the state.
  Formulate policies to bring 40% of foreign investment coming into the country to Maharashtra, ensuring that projects remain within the state and create maximum local employment.
A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!30  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस  Create a new ‘Golden Triangle’ by connecting industrial centres in 
Marathwada, Vidarbha and North Maharashtra, generating new economic and employment opportunities.
  Encourage the development of private industrial estates.
  Start 50 research centres across the state through the ‘Empower Maharashtra Startup Initiative,’ providing an annual fund of Rs 1 crore for 200 innovative startups. In addition, establish a ‘Cluster Seed Fund’ with 25% grants for startups in smaller cities, giving priority to 20% of women entrepreneurs.
  Create policies to position Maharashtra as a leader in the semiconductor and lithium battery production sectors.
  Develop special industrial estates for micro and small industries.
  Promote the use of advanced technologies such as IoT, Artificial Intelligence (AI), Augmented Reality (AR), Visual Augmented Reality (VR), Automation and Robotics in the MSME sector.
  Facilitate the connection of industrial estates with main cities, ports and airports through roads and highways and encourage the construction of railway routes via the Railway Ministry, Maharashtra Railway Infrastructure Development Corporation, special authorities and local self-government bodies.
  Develop schemes to support food processing industries based on agriculture and horticulture in each district.
  Establish a ‘biofuel hub’ in Marathwada, Vidarbha and North Maharashtra, regions known for soybean production, by creating production centres that procure raw materials from local farmers, thereby developing a ‘bioenergy supply chain.’
A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  31   
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस  Frame an independent space policy for Maharashtra, recognising 
the potential in space research and development. This will benefit new startups and allocate special spaces for MSMEs interested in this field within new industrial estates.
  Establish a financial institution similar to NABARD to provide credit support for women, tribal, SC, ST, minority and other backward communities starting MSMEs.
  Establish independent industrial estates for women entrepreneurs.
  Support the silver industry in Hatkanangale by developing a silver cluster.
  Make special provisions for modernising the auto cluster in Pune.
  Pursue the expansion of the runway at Chhatrapati Sambhajinagar’s Chikalthana Airport.
  Cancel the Rs 100 daily non-agricultural tax on tents in Sindhudurg district’s accommodation and breakfast scheme.
  Explore the possibility of establishing a commercial complex on the Mumbai-Gujarat highway, similar to BKC.
  Permit amendments to the Mathadi Law to exclude registered entities in the production and service sectors.
  Focus on positioning Maharashtra as a leading state in religious and spiritual tourism, medical tourism, adventure tourism and trade exhibitions.
  Efforts will be taken to set up the first solar panel recycling plant in Nagpur.
A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!32  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसEmployment     
  Generate 1.25 million new jobs through the state 
government over the next five years.
  Provide a minimum of 200 days of employment under MGNREGA.
  Implement an ‘Urban Employment Guarantee Scheme’ modelled on the rural employment guarantee scheme.
  Provide a subsidy for economically weaker sections for self-employment in auto rickshaws, taxis and similar ventures.
  Conduct a ‘Skill Census’ to identify the skills of Maharashtra’s workforce, assess gaps and understand the skills needed by industries.
  Reserve jobs for Agniveers returning after their service period, with reservation benefits exclusively for Agniveers who are Maharashtra residents.Work from  
Hometown  
Policy
The availability of a 
nationwide digital network and high-speed internet has created favourable conditions for the IT industry to establish itself in semi-urban and rural areas. Especially during the COVID-19 pandemic, the work-from-home culture has become well-established. Recognising this trend, steps will be taken to implement a Work from Hometown policy.
Currently, working from 
smaller towns often impacts productivity due to a lack of necessary facilities. To address this, co-working spaces will be developed in Maharashtra’s talukas, offering shared office spaces for companies. This will allow IT employees to work from their hometowns comfortably. The government will take the initiative to establish such business centres, facilitating a higher quality of life while easing the burden on urban infrastructure.A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  33   
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसRight to 
Disconnect
Due to the digital 
work culture, working 
hours and location 
have lost meaning. With the expectation 
of 24-hour employ
-
ee availability, work 
hours now extend 
beyond regular time, 
impacting employees’ health and family life. 
To reduce this stress, 
the ‘Right to Discon
-
nect’ policy will be introduced, allowing 
employees to refrain 
from responding to emails and messages 
outside work hours. 
Maharashtra will be the first state in the 
country to implement 
this policy, recognis
-
ing it as a matter of human rights.Labour  
  Repeal the four labour codes introduced by the Modi 
government.
  Set a minimum wage of Rs 21,000 for workers.
  Extend social security to workers like Anganwadi employees, domestic helps, construction labourers and workers from unorganised sectors. 
  Extend social security and special legislation to gig workers 
  Reverse the Mahayuti government’s move to raise the Factory Act limit from 10 to 20 employees, bringing companies that fall outside the law’s scope back within its purview.
  Increase the per-worker treatment cost under the ESI scheme and improve ESI hospitals and clinics across the state, expanding their services. Extend the ‘Mahatma Phule Jan Arogya Yojana’ to cover all diseases. 
  Ban contractual hiring for ‘C’ and ‘D’ category government jobs.
  Prioritise the healthy living of solid waste management and sanitation workers.
  Grant full-time worker status to employees under the NEEM scheme.A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!34  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसEnvironment
Climate change has brought forth numerous challenges for 
humanity, such as recurring droughts, heatwaves, and intense 
rainfall in short durations. To tackle these issues, it is essential 
for the entire world to come together and take collective action. In this spirit, 196 countries at the United Nations Conference held 
in Paris unanimously committed to reducing the adverse effects 
of climate change. We are all bound by this agreement. When considering environmental action, our goal in Maharashtra is to 
act with greater resolve and seriousness.
  Aim to meet the target of reducing carbon emissions by 2030 in 
line with the Paris Agreement.
  Make substantial financial provisions to clean and make all rivers in 
the state pollution-free, prioritising the cleanliness programmes 
for Indrayani and Bhima rivers.
A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  35  
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस  Define ‘Red-Blue Lines’ for all rivers, streams, brooks, lakes and natural 
water sources to prevent any encroachment within these zones.
  Provide grants and incentives for sewage treatment plants in 
cities and towns, ensuring that industrial wastewater is treated 
before being released into rivers, with treatment plants set up on 
a priority basis.
  Preserve open spaces in cities to absorb carbon dioxide  
and promote urban and semi-urban afforestation, expanding 
green cover.
  Focus on conserving biodiversity.
  Mandate the treatment and recycling of all types of waste, 
including medical, electronic and construction waste.
  Promote and prioritise clean and green energy projects to  
reduce air pollution.
  Establish specific criteria for sustainable, environmentally enriched 
villages and ensure 100% implementation.
  Set up centres at the taluka level to monitor air quality, with real-
time air quality updates.
  Pay special attention to Mumbai’s environment, taking strategic 
decisions to preserve mangrove forests, prevent marine pollution, 
curb encroachments along the Mithi River and halt environmental 
damage in the name of development.
  Target generating 40% of Maharashtra’s electricity from renewable 
sources by 2040.
  Ensure all projects are environmentally sound before initiation.
  Provide special grants to NGOs conducting awareness  
and educational activities related to the environment.
  Allocate a climate fund in every budget.
  Formulate comprehensive policies to promote solar, wind and tidal 
energy generation on barren lands.
A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!36  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसPeople’s Welfare
Society, the state and the nation are shaped by its people. Every 
citizen of Maharashtra, without any discrimination based on 
caste, religion, colour, language, sect, or region, should have 
equal opportunities for holistic development and progress. Our vision is that the entire state should live harmoniously and in 
unity. Every individual deserves access to quality education, 
economic progress, healthcare and social dignity in keeping with the changing times. We prioritise integrating Marathi culture and 
traditions with a modern lifestyle, ensuring that Maharashtra 
remains ever-progressive.
A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  37   
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसSocial Justice
  Implement suitable recommendations from the Bapat and Renke 
Commissions addressing the issues of nomadic and denotified tribes.
  Make budgetary provisions proportional to the population of backward, 
marginalised and tribal communities, ensuring full utilisation of the funds. 
Enact legislation to secure the budget for these categories. 
  Ensure health services for the tribal community with a special focus on     
nutrition.
  Establish a research and training institute in the name of Rafiq Zakaria, 
modelled after ‘Sarathi’, to promote the economic and educational 
progress of minorities.
  Set up the Tanda Development Corporation.
  Significantly increase funding for ‘Maharashtra Research Advancement 
and Training Institute’ (AMRUT) and ‘Tribal Research and Training 
Institute’ (TRTI) to support the holistic development of economically 
weaker students and tribal students.
 Increase the business loan limit offered by all development corporations
  Offer Rs 10 lakh interest-free loans for business purposes to educated 
unemployed individuals from the Banjara community through the 
Vasantrao Naik Corporation..
  Provide special funds for higher and overseas education for nomadic and 
denotified communities.
  Make deliberate efforts to provide technical skills to economically weaker 
and school-dropout students, enabling them to access employment and 
self-employment opportunities.
  Introduce subjects like English, Mathematics and Science in madrasas as 
part of their development and modernisation.
  Grant local authorities the right to limit property taxes for houses given 
under the ‘Ramai Housing Scheme.’
  Provide state funds for repairs of housing units under the ‘Ramai Housing 
Scheme’ that have completed 20 years.
A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!38  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस  Build shelters within municipal corporation limits for urban poor residents.
  Ensure strict enforcement of the Prohibition of Manual Scavenging Act, 
with a commitment that no community shall have to perform such tasks 
by hand. Mechanise the work and give priority to existing workers in the 
transition.
  Prioritise the protection of tribal forest rights and document and preserve 
traditional tribal forest knowledge. Formulate a policy to safeguard the 
ownership rights of tribal knowledge.
  Accept documents from the maternal lineage for caste validity certificates 
for caste groups within nomadic-denotified communities that follow a 
matriarchal family structure.
Education
  Will insist on filling the vacancies as a top priority in all government and 
private schools as well as colleges. 
  Extend the age limit for free education under the Right to Education Act.
  Regulate fees for schools, colleges and private coaching classes.
  Increase the current budget allocation for education to improve the 
quality of government schools.
  Set up digital classrooms in all government schools across the state.
  Provide free sanitary napkins, bicycles and transport services for all girl 
students in local self-government schools.
  Reverse the decision to close Zilla Parishad schools. Ensure no school is 
closed due to low enrolment and keep all schools under the purview of the RTE.
  Formulate policies for parental awareness and child education, considering 
that a child’s intellectual, social and cultural development progresses 
rapidly in the first six years of life.
  Open government engineering and medical colleges in every district.
A Student 
Rights 
Commission 
will be established 
to address 
issues related to admissions, 
examinations, 
and results for students.A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  39   
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
  Offer interest-free educational loans for higher education.
  Ensure immediate release of scholarships for OBC students post-Class 10 
and create a grievance system to address delays, resolving issues within 
21 days.
  Construct 3 hostels for OBC students pursuing education beyond Class 10 
in each district.
  Increase the number of scholarships under the Rajshree Shahu Maharaj 
Scholarship and relax eligibility criteria.
  Increase the scholarship fund provided through ‘BARTI’, ‘Mahajyoti’ and 
‘Sarathi’.
  Operate ITIs in two shifts for those who have not passed Class 10 and 12, 
given the severe unemployment situation.
  Facilitate joint efforts between the Maharashtra State Skill Development 
Society and IIT Bombay to enhance employability and skill creation.
  Schedule MPSC exams in a fixed timeline similar to UPSC, ensuring results 
are declared within 45 days and waiving the entrance exam fee.
  Establish 3 libraries in each district and one study room in each taluka, 
totalling 358 air-conditioned study rooms for competitive exam aspirants.
  Review the anti-ragging law and strictly implement the 2012 ‘Harassment-
Free Maharashtra’ policy.
  Establish a ‘Fishing and Marine Science’ University in Konkan.
  Set up a College of Planning and Architecture in Pune.
  Develop a ‘Teacher Training University’ to produce skilled educators.
Healthcare 
  Run the ‘Niramay Maharashtra’ campaign to promote physical and mental 
wellness for Maharashtra’s population. Under this campaign, encourage 
initiatives on yoga, exercise, diet planning and regular health check-ups, 
organised by public, voluntary and local self-government organisations.
  Implement a Right to Health policy to ensure free and quality healthcare 
services for all, improving healthcare standards across various levels.A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!40  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस  Equip every sub-district hospital and establish mohalla clinics  
in all cities.
  Construct a 100-bed modern hospital in each taluka.
  Make healthcare services more accountable and transparent by 
involving representatives and social organisations in community-
based oversight and planning, activating community health 
committees with public participation.
  Gradually increase the health budget to 8% of the state’s budget, 
following the National Health Policy.
  Develop a ‘Health Workforce Policy’ for the state, filling all vacant 
positions in the health department. Regularise nurses appointed 
on a contractual basis. 
  Increase the remuneration to ASHA, Anganwadi workers and 
assistants.
  Provide all essential medicines free of cost to all patients, supported 
by a comprehensive medicine procurement and distribution system 
and increase the number of generic medicine centres.
  Provide ‘Jijau Kits’ with essential medicines for newborns and 
mothers to reduce infant and maternal mortality rates.
  Launch the ‘Stree Shakti’ initiative to reduce anaemia in women and 
seriously address child malnutrition. Offer free HPV vaccines for all 
girls and young women aged 9 to 26 and provide free treatment 
for women with breast, cervical and ovarian cancer, as well as subsidised cancer screening.
  Establish a Malnutrition Control Board with a goal to make 
Maharashtra malnutrition-free.
  Establish a Tribal Health and Nutrition Mission, coordinating with 
relevant departments with a special budget provision. Implement awareness programmes, genetic testing, counselling for couples, 
healthcare provisions and medicine supply in health centres to 
mitigate the effects of sickle cell anaemia.Right to 
Healthcare
A Right to Healthcare 
policy will be developed for the state of Maharashtra, aiming to improve service standards across various levels as per healthcare benchmarks. This will ensure that diverse types of government healthcare services are easily accessible 
to people in both rural 
and urban areas. The healthcare budget will be increased to support these improvements. By reforming and expanding the healthcare system, a framework for Universal Health Care will be established. Through this system, every resident of Maharashtra will have access to quality healthcare services at no cost, not only in government hospitals but also in selected private hospitals on the government’s panel.
A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  41   
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
  Enforce the Patient Rights Charter in all private and government 
hospitals, mandating the display of pricing information as per 
regulations. Set up grievance redressal cells in each district and a 
toll-free helpline for patient assistance.
  Provide free medication and testing for diabetes and high blood 
pressure patients. Initiate extensive programmes to curb the rising 
rates of malaria, dengue, chikungunya and TB. Offer free dialysis 
services for the underprivileged.
  Partner with private hospitals in the ‘Amrut Blood on Call’ scheme 
to promptly address blood shortages. 
  Increase the availability of air ambulances for accident and critical 
patients.
  Launch a state-wide ‘Telemedicine’ helpline.
  Run the ‘Nirmal Jal’ campaign to provide clean drinking water in 
Marathwada, Vidarbha and North Maharashtra, using advance 
technologies.
  Set a goal to raise Maharashtra’s average life expectancy to 77 
years, ensuring a healthy and robust population.
  Establish counselling centres to address mental health issues 
arising from a competitive, fast-paced lifestyle, excessive online 
gaming and digital addiction, tackling problems like loneliness, 
depression, negativity and aggression.
  Implement stringent policies to address deficiencies in services 
provided by government hospitals.
  Take necessary precautions to prevent assaults on doctors.A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!42  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसLGBTQIA+   
  Remain committed to integrating LGBTQIA+ individuals into the 
mainstream.
  Propose reservation for LGBTQIA+ individuals in government jobs and 
implement a special scholarship scheme for their education.
  Form a new advisory committee under the Law Commission to address 
the specific needs of the LGBTQIA+ community and take steps to amend 
and reform relevant laws.
  Establish dedicated health and counselling centres to address the mental 
and health challenges faced by the LGBTQIA+ community.
  Set up special facilities for skill training to create livelihood opportunities 
for LGBTQIA+ individuals.
Safety of the Women 
  Aim to build a ‘Nirbhay Maharashtra’ for the safety of women,  
girls and boys.
  Under ‘Nirbhay Maharashtra’, provide self-defence training for women 
and encourage girls to participate in sports to build confidence and 
bravery.
  Strictly enforce the ‘Shakti’ law to prevent violence against women and 
girls.
  Adopt strict policies to curb violence and abuse against women  
and girls.
  Rehabilitate women who have been victims of sexual abuse and create 
public awareness to prevent violence against women.
  Establish at least one all-women police station in every district.
  Launch a dedicated helpline to prevent digital crimes against women, 
with expedited resolution through fast-track courts.
A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  43  
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
  Develop a roadmap for implementing safe cities for women and 
provide additional facilities for women commuting to work.
  Conduct safety audits in schools to ensure the security of girl 
students.
Respect for Women 
  Audit the implementation of the gender budget for women-centric 
financial planning.
  Strive to enforce laws that ensure equal pay for men and women in 
the unorganised rural sector.
  Advocate for senior care centres in government and private offices, recognising that many families now face the challenge of leaving 
elderly members alone at home.
  Develop special schemes to support women who had to leave their 
careers due to family or personal reasons, helping them restart and 
contribute to national progress.
  Create a policy to offer two days of optional paid leave for women 
during menstruation, acknowledging the associated discomfort.
  Take steps to ensure justice and respectful treatment for widows 
and enact laws to prevent forced adherence to harmful practices 
imposed on widows.
  Prioritise employment for widows and single women.
  Establish an independent department for Self-Help Groups (SHGs) to 
foster leadership skills and provide market access for their products.
  Construct hostels for girls in each taluka.
  Review and update the women’s policy every three years.A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!44  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसDignity of the Elderly
  Establish a ‘Senior Citizen Welfare Association’ to address the 
security, health, economic and social needs of senior citizens.
  Introduce an ‘Honour Scheme for Senior Citizens’ to uphold 
their dignity and respect, ensuring that physically and mentally 
vulnerable elderly citizens receive government services at their 
doorstep.
  Strengthen a skilled system to provide quality and respectful 
healthcare services to ensure seniors live with dignity in old age.
  Set up facilities in all cities to deliver healthcare services to senior 
citizens at home.
  Establish care centers for seniors across the state. Create facilities 
where daycare centres for children and care homes for the elderly are located within the same complex, offering a shared space for 
both generations.
  Develop sufficient recreational centres for senior citizens.
Persons with Disabilities
 Provide ‘BPL’ benefits for severely disabled individuals.
  Advocate for the removal of GST on assistive devices and 
equipment for persons with disabilities.
  Prioritise commercial and residential spaces for severely disabled individuals in organisations like ‘MHADA’ and ‘HUDCO’.
  Substantially increase the minimal existing funding to provide free artificial limbs and assistive devices for persons with disabilities.
  Strictly enforce accessibility regulations to ensure ease of movement for persons with disabilities in public spaces.
A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024   |  45   
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
Literature and Culture 
  Provide grants of Rs. 5 lakh, Rs. 10 lakh and Rs. 1 crore, 
respectively, for Marathi literary conventions at the district, 
state and national levels.
  Triple the funding for government-recognised libraries.
  Establish Marathi book libraries in every Gram Panchayat.
  Develop the ‘Marathi Asmita Tab’ containing the Marathi 
Encyclopaedia, Marathi Cultural Encyclopaedia and classic 
Marathi literature, making it available at an affordable 
price.
  Increase the current funding for Marathi films by 20%.
  Launch special scheme for technicians, artists, backstage workers and their families, after assessing their concerns. 
  Strictly enforce laws to prevent piracy of films and books.
  Establish research centres to preserve Marathi dialects such as Ahirani, Khandeshi, Varhadi, Powari, Banjara, 
Malvani, Katkari and Halbi.
  Initiate a project for documenting folk arts.
  Provide grants for producing Marathi documentaries.
  Launch a state-level Prabodhan Award, inspired by the 
Jnanpith Award, to honour contributions in literature and 
intellectual fields.
  Develop a cultural tourism plan connecting Maharashtra’s 
significant forts.
  Create government art galleries in major cities for art presentations.
  Encourage the Marathi Literary Katta initiative in urban areas.For Abhijat  
Marathi 
While preserving the  
prestige of the Marathi 
language in Maharashtra, policies will be developed to strengthen the language’s economic foundation. As part of this initiative, shops will be made available for ‘Books for Every Village’ to promote Marathi literature. Efforts will be made to ensure there are bookstores in every district across the state. Steps will be taken to make the ‘Book Purchase Scheme’ more transparent through government initiatives. Recognising the importance of librarians, a minimum salary target of Rs. 20,000 will be set. Advocacy will be pursued to eliminate GST on books to make them available at affordable prices. A white paper on Marathi schools in the state will be released. Additionally, support will be provided to organisations working for Marathi in Greater Maharashtra.A Bright Maharashtra... 
A Leading Maharashtra!
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेसSports 
  Launch the Maharashtra Olympic Mission to support Marathi athletes 
in reaching the Olympics.
  Double the sports budget allocation in the state budget.
  Develop modern sports complexes in Nashik, Amravati, Nagpur, Raigad and Sambhajinagar, modelled after Balewadi (Pune).
  Establish advanced sports medicine centres in Maharashtra’s eight regional complexes.
  Provide health insurance for athletes participating in school sports competitions.
  Implement the ‘Sports Ground for Every Village’ scheme.
  Engage youth vulnerable to drugs and illicit activities in sports and 
arts to divert them from such habits.
Security 
  Implement a zero-tolerance policy against any behaviour causing 
harassment, disrespect, or shame to women.
  Expand the CCTV network at schools, colleges, public places and religious sites.
  Ensure that all reserved positions for women in the police force are filled to full capacity.
  Create an additional 50,000 positions in the police force.
  Equip the police with modern technology and weaponry to strengthen the security system, following the recommendations of the Ram 
Pradhan Committee.
  Advocate with the central government to establish a ‘Cyber Security 
Hub’ in response to rising cybercrime.
  Establish a ‘Forensic Science University’ in the state.
  Commit to preserving constitutional rights for all and creating an environment where no one feels unsafe.
  Adopt a strict policy for immediate and severe action against those making statements that incite religious hatred.
  Enforce strict policies against mob lynching.
46  |    Maha Vikas Aghadi  |  MaharashtraNama  |  Legislative Assembly Elections 2024
 Maha Vikas Aghadi
Manifesto Committee Heads
Vandana Chavan
former Member of  
Parliament, rajya Sabha 
Prithviraj Chavan
former chief Minister
Subhash Desai
Shivsena Leader
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस
Publisher:
General Secretary - Indian National Congress
General Secretary - Nationalist Congress Party (Sharadchandra Pawar)
Secretary - Shiv Sena (Uddhav Balasaheb Thackeray)
Copies: 100 | Printer: Akruti Print Solutions Pvt. Ltd., Pune - 411009
Date of Publication: 10 November 2024
भारतीय 
राष्ट्रीय काँग्रेस